UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, THURSDAY, JANUARY 22, 2026

No. 15

House of Representatives
The House met at 9 a.m. and was
called to order by the Speaker pro tempore (Mr. VALADAO).
f

DESIGNATION OF THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from the Speaker:
WASHINGTON, DC,
January 22, 2026.
I hereby appoint the Honorable DAVID G.
VALADAO to act as Speaker pro tempore on
this day.
MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

PRAYER
The Chaplain, the Reverend Margaret
Grun Kibben, offered the following
prayer:
In You, O Lord, all things were created. We may be inclined to think of
Heaven as Your only domain, but everything on Earth is governed by You.
These things we see and the things
we cannot see are all part of Your divine design. You have allotted thrones
and powers, rulers and authorities
their time. In all things, You remind us
that everything has been created not
just through You, but for You.
Forgive us when we fail to remember
that You never relinquish Your authority, leaving us to our own devices.
Rather, You grant us responsibility for
the stewardship of Your creation.
On this body, You have laid the mantle of governance, not that it would
take the fate of this country into its
own hands, but that each of us would
look to You for Your direction so that
Your purposes would be accomplished
through our faithfulness to Your will.
For You, O God, are before all things.
Only in You will all things, our work,
our hopes, our lives, hold together.
Guide us then, O Sovereign Lord,
into this day. It is in Your eternal
name we pray.

Amen.
f

THE JOURNAL
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair has examined the Journal of the
last day’s proceedings and announces
to the House the approval thereof.
Pursuant to clause 1 of rule I, the
Journal stands approved.
f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Will the
gentleman from New Mexico (Mr.
VASQUEZ) come forward and lead the
House in the Pledge of Allegiance.
Mr. VASQUEZ led the Pledge of Allegiance as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Chair will entertain up to 15 requests
for 1-minute speeches on each side of
the aisle.
f

MARCH FOR LIFE
(Mr. MESSMER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. MESSMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to speak about something very
important to me, my family, and the
majority of Hoosiers in Indiana’s
Eighth District: the protection of the
unborn and the 2026 March for Life.
As a devout Catholic, I am grateful
that from my position in Congress, I
can support legislation that protects
the defenseless unborn and can stand
up for their God-given right to survive,
a gift that truly should only be endowed upon any of us by the grace of
our creator.

It is truly inspiring to witness the
multitudes of Americans who journey
from far distances across this great
country to attend the march.
In my role in the House of Representatives, I am a reliable vote for the prolife community and have been able to
sponsor many pieces of legislation that
provide for the needs of pregnant mothers and the life they are carrying in the
womb.
I am honored to celebrate each person participating in this year’s march,
and I am grateful to be in the position
to support the hopes of every Hoosier
and American devoted to the sanctity
of life.
It is my great privilege and fervent
promise that I will never give up fighting for those who cannot fight for
themselves.
f

TAKEOVER OF GREENLAND
(Mr. VASQUEZ asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. VASQUEZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to urge my Republican colleagues to reject the President’s proposed takeover of Greenland.
As we celebrate Dr. King’s legacy, I
am reminded of his belief that the ultimate measure of a person is not where
they stand in moments of comfort and
convenience but where they stand at
times of challenge and controversy.
This is one of the most turbulent and
divided times in our Nation’s history.
As a governing body and as a nation,
our individual and collective character
is being measured and tested. We must
not fail that test.
America must show the world that
we truly are a nation built not on hostility but on reasoned diplomacy and
the deeper values of freedom and liberty that our forefathers fought for.
I come from a State with a long and
proud history of military service, brave

b This symbol represents the time of day during the House proceedings, e.g., b 1407 is 2:07 p.m.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
H1175

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.000

H22JAPT1

H1176

men and women who stood up courageously to tyranny, fighting for liberation, strengthening world peace, upholding law, and reflecting the patriotic values that we claim to defend.
The time is now in which our true
character is being tested, and my Republican colleagues must decide if we
will honor those who have gone before
us or betray their legacy and our deepest values.
I implore this body to act with courage and moral character and reject any
future proposals from the President to
take over Greenland.
f

REPEAL SECTION 230
(Mr. PATRONIS asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute.)
Mr. PATRONIS. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to urge my colleagues to support
H.R. 7045, the PROTECT Act, because
it is time to repeal section 230 and hold
Big Tech accountable for the harm
being done to our children.
As a father of two young boys, I
refuse to stand by and allow harm to
happen to our children when there are
no consequences, and these companies
walk away without responsibility.
Big Tech has become a digital
fentanyl that is slowly killing our children. It is pushing parents to the sidelines. It is acting as therapists. It is replacing relationships with robots. This
must stop.
Parents are fighting a system designed to replace them. Algorithms and
chatbots fuel addiction, depression,
self-harm, and even suicide, all while
these companies hide behind section
230.
When social media leads our kids to
suicidal thoughts, our children believe
they are better off gone, and no one is
held responsible. This is a deeply broken system.
I demand accountability. I am standing up for our children, and I am saying that the double standard ends now.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

RECOGNIZING CHANCELLOR
SHARON GABER
(Ms. ADAMS asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. ADAMS. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize Chancellor Sharon
Gaber and the exceptional work that
she has done leading the University of
North Carolina at Charlotte.
Under Chancellor Gaber’s leadership,
UNC Charlotte has experienced record
enrollment, achieved the coveted R1
status, and made investments that are
transforming Charlotte’s education
landscape and our community.
UNC Charlotte has become a powerful engine for economic growth, driving
innovation, workforce development,
and research partnerships that benefit
Charlotte and North Carolina.
I am also proud to see her work recognized as Charlotte Business Journal’s 2025 Business Person of the Year.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Chancellor Gaber and the entire UNC Charlotte community on the transformative
impact the university has had on Charlotte-Mecklenburg and our State.
This is a proud moment for the 49ers
and Queen City.
f

b 0910
RECOGNIZING IRVIN J. ‘‘BUCK’’
PRICE
(Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina asked
and was given permission to address
the House for 1 minute and to revise
and extend his remarks.)
Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, it is a heartfelt honor to recognize a true American hero, Irvin J.
‘‘Buck’’ Price of Tarboro, North Carolina, a World War II seaman first class.
At just 17, Buck answered our Nation’s call and enlisted in the Navy.
Serving courageously during D-Day
aboard the USS LST–285, he witnessed
the horrors of war while ferrying personnel and supplies to Omaha Beach.
Despite this, he humbly states: ‘‘I was
doing my duty.’’
Buck’s bravery has been recognized
with numerous awards, including the
French Legion of Honor.
After returning home, he dedicated
himself to serving our community and
his church, First Baptist, where a plaza
will be named in his honor.
As he has recently celebrated his
100th birthday, he is still wearing his
uniform well and with pride.
Buck, we thank you with all of our
hearts.
f

CONGRATULATING DERRICK ROSE
(Mr. DAVIS of Illinois asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. DAVIS of Illinois. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to congratulate Derrick
Rose, an outstanding professional basketball player, whose jersey is being
retired today by the Chicago Bulls.
Derrick grew up on the South Side of
Chicago and went to Simeon high
school. He played much of his professional basketball on the West Side with
the Chicago Bulls, which I represent.
He played on the same floor and joined
the ranks of Michael Jordan, Scottie
Pippen, Bob Love, Mickey Johnson,
and Norm Van Lier. Mickey Johnson
lives in the same neighborhood as I do.
Scottie Pippen and Bob Love both grew
up in rural America near where I grew
up, and we are extremely proud of their
accomplishments. Scottie was born in
Arkansas, and Bob was born in Louisiana.
Congratulations to Derrick Rose,
who is also actively involved in community affairs with youth.
I also take the opportunity to congratulate Mr. Jerry Reinsdorf and the
Chicago Bulls and all of these superstars for what they have meant to
America.

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

HONORING DERRICK ROSE
(Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute.)
Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois. Mr. Speaker,
today we honor the spirit of a son of
Chicago whose game carried the heartbeat of a city, Derrick Rose.
From the blacktops of Englewood to
the bright lights of the United Center,
Rose showed not only talent, but will
and determination. He played basketball the way that Chicago lives: fast,
fearless, and unafraid of the hard road.
As the youngest MVP in NBA history, Derrick Rose attacked the lane
like it owed him something, lifting up
the franchise and a fan base that saw
itself in his humility.
He never asked to be a sports hero,
yet he became one with a quiet grace
that spoke louder than the celebration.
Then came the injuries, but Derrick
Rose came back again and again,
teaching young people that setbacks do
not cancel destiny.
Derrick Rose reminded Chicagoans
and this Nation that even when you
fall, you rise. For that we honor not
just the basketball player but a symbol
of enduring American grit.
f

END HUNGER NOW
(Mr. MCGOVERN asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, local
grocers play a pivotal role in improving access to nutritious food. That is
why I joined my dear friend and colleague,
Congresswoman
AYANNA
PRESSLEY, and State and local leaders
on a visit to El Valle de la Sultana
Market in Everett, Massachusetts, last
Friday as part of my statewide End
Hunger Now Tour.
Victor and Martha Gutierrez and
Audriana Perdomo own La Sultana
markets, which have been providing
cultural staples to the people of Everett, east Boston, and Somerville for 30
years. We visited the newest location
in Everett, which was stocked with delicious and culturally appropriate foods
like fresh produce and meat and heard
directly from people who shop at the
store for groceries.
Their message was loud and clear.
Skyrocketing food prices and cuts to
SNAP are impacting their ability to
feed their families. Their powerful stories provide me further motivation to
fight Trump policies that are driving
up the cost of food and to once and for
all end hunger now.
f

WE WILL BEAT CANCER
(Ms. SEWELL asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute.)
Ms. SEWELL. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
support of H.R. 842, the Nancy Gardner
Sewell Medicare Multi-Cancer Early
Detection Screening Coverage Act,

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.003

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

which was included in the funding
package being considered by the House
today.
Named in honor of my mother who
lost her battle to pancreatic cancer in
2021, this legislation would expand access to cutting-edge cancer screenings
for America’s seniors, ensuring Medicare coverage for these emerging tools
once they become FDA approved.
I am immensely grateful that this
bill was led by Republican sponsor,
Congressman JODEY ARRINGTON, and
the many organizations and patient advocacy groups who helped us push this
bill across the finish line. I am giving
a big shout-out to the American Cancer
Society
Cancer
Action
Network,
PanCAN, the Prevent Cancer Foundation, the National Minority Quality
Forum, and so many others.
Thanks to their tireless advocacy,
H.R. 842 is the most cosponsored bill in
the 119th Congress with 339 cosponsors
in the House and 68 cosponsors in the
Senate.
I ask my colleagues to support this
important legislation. Rest in power,
my sweet mother. We will beat cancer.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

CONCERNING STATE OF SERVICE
AT SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
(Mr. LATIMER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today with great concern about the
current state of service in the Social
Security Administration.
Last year, the so-called department
of governmental elimination, DOGE,
diminished the agency’s workforce,
forcing thousands of employees to quit
or be fired. This has left inexperienced
staff to handle rising workloads and
call volumes with minimal training.
The Social Security Administration
has also created new roadblocks to
service in the name of efficiency and
fraud prevention, requiring seniors and
people with disabilities to complete
some transactions in person or online,
rather than by phone.
Yet, reduced staffing levels at field
offices have made it more difficult to
schedule a timely appointment.
In my district, the Social Security
Administration closed the White Plains
hearing office, forcing constituents in
Westchester to travel farther distances
at a greater expense to receive in-person service.
I implore this body to hold the Social
Security Administration accountable
and ensure that our constituents receive good, convenient, quality service.
We must immediately provide more
funding and reinstate positions that
were lost. We will be held accountable
by the voters if we fail this task.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1177

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 7148, CONSOLIDATED APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026; AND
PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 7147, DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026; AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, by direction
of the Committee on Rules, I call up
House Resolution 1014 and ask for its
immediate consideration.
The Clerk read the resolution, as follows:
H. RES. 1014
Resolved, That at any time after adoption
of this resolution the Speaker may, pursuant
to clause 2(b) of rule XVIII, declare the
House resolved into the Committee of the
Whole House on the state of the Union for
consideration of the bill (H.R. 7148) making
further consolidated appropriations for the
fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes. The first reading of the bill
shall be dispensed with. All points of order
against consideration of the bill are waived.
General debate shall be confined to the bill
and shall not exceed one hour equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on
Appropriations or their respective designees.
After general debate the bill shall be considered for amendment under the five-minute
rule. The amendment printed in part A of
the report of the Committee on Rules accompanying this resolution shall be considered
as adopted in the House and in the Committee of the Whole. The bill, as amended,
shall be considered as read. All points of
order against provisions in the bill, as
amended, are waived. No further amendment
to the bill, as amended, shall be in order except those printed in part B of the report of
the Committee on Rules. Each such further
amendment may be offered only in the order
printed in the report, may be offered only by
a Member designated in the report, shall be
considered as read, shall be debatable for the
time specified in the report equally divided
and controlled by the proponent and an opponent, shall not be subject to amendment,
and shall not be subject to a demand for division of the question in the House or in the
Committee of the Whole. All points of order
against such further amendments are
waived. At the conclusion of consideration of
the bill for amendment the Committee shall
rise and report the bill, as amended, to the
House with such further amendments as may
have been adopted. The previous question
shall be considered as ordered on the bill, as
amended, and on any further amendment
thereto to final passage without intervening
motion except one motion to recommit.
SEC. 2. Upon adoption of this resolution it
shall be in order to consider in the House the
bill (H.R. 7147) making further consolidated
appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
All points of order against consideration of
the bill are waived. The bill shall be considered as read. All points of order against provisions in the bill are waived. The previous
question shall be considered as ordered on
the bill and on any amendment thereto to
final passage without intervening motion except: (1) one hour of debate equally divided
and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Appropriations or their respective designees; and
(2) one motion to recommit.
SEC. 3. The chair of the Committee on Appropriations may insert in the Congressional
Record not later than January 23, 2026, such
material as he may deem explanatory of H.R.
7148 and H.R. 7147.

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SEC. 4. The Clerk shall not transmit to the
Senate a message that the House has passed
H.R. 7148 until H.R. 7147 is passed by the
House.
SEC. 5. In the engrossment of H.R. 7148, the
Clerk shall—
(a) add the text of Divisions A, B, and C of
H.R. 7006, as passed by the House, as new
matter to follow Division D of H.R. 7148, redesignated as Divisions E, F, and G, respectively;
(b) add the text of titles I through V of
H.R. 7147, as passed by the House, as new
matter designated as Division H, to follow
the text added pursuant to subsection (a);
(c) redesignate Divisions E and F of H.R.
7148 as Divisions I and J, respectively;
(d) assign appropriate designations to provisions within the engrossment;
(e) conform cross-references and provisions
for short titles within the engrossment; and
(f) be authorized to make technical corrections, to include corrections in spelling,
punctuation, page and line numbering, section numbering, and insertion of appropriate
headings.
SEC. 6. House Resolution 375, as amended
by the amendments printed in part C of the
report of the Committee on Rules accompanying this resolution, is hereby adopted.

The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
YAKYM). The gentlewoman from North
Carolina is recognized for 1 hour.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, for the purpose of debate only, I yield the customary 30 minutes to the gentleman
from Massachusetts (Mr. MCGOVERN),
pending which I yield myself such time
as I may consume. During consideration of this resolution, all time yielded is for the purpose of debate only.
b 0920
GENERAL LEAVE

Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may
have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from North Carolina?
There was no objection.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of the rule and of the underlying
legislation.
This morning, the Rules Committee
met and produced a rule, House Resolution 1014, providing for consideration of
H.R. 7147 and H.R. 7148.
The rule provides for consideration of
H.R. 7148, the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026, under a structured rule
with two amendments made in order.
The rule further provides that H.R.
7147, the Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026, will be
considered under a closed rule.
The rule provides each bill 1 hour of
general debate divided equally between
the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Appropriations or their respective designees and
one motion to recommit.
Additionally, in the engrossment of
H.R. 7148 after final passage in the
House, the text of H.R. 7006, the Financial Services and General Government
and National Security, Department of
State, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2026, and H.R. 7147 will

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.006

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1178

be added to the bill. The Clerk will redesignate the sections and be authorized to make technical and conforming
changes.
Mr. Speaker, with consideration of
this rule and its two underlying measures, the House stands firmly upon the
1-yard line. We are, indeed, ready to
move forward and complete the appropriations process. We are ready to lock
in the final components of our 12 fiscal
year 2026 appropriations bills.
Additionally, we are ready to further
cement our long-overdue return to regular order in this legislative body. It
will be a welcome return, indeed, Mr.
Speaker.
Here is the simplest of truths that all
of us here understand and need to be
reminded of regularly: There will never
be such a thing as a perfect piece of
legislation or a perfect package of
bills.
Perfection is a phantom. Many may
seek it with the best of intentions, but
in the end, it is unattainable. That is
just a fact of life that we must understand.
I can imagine that there are Members who want to see more within these
measures, and there are some who
want to see less. Both positions are to
be expected, but here is the bottom
line: We should never let the perfect be
the enemy of the good.
The two appropriations measures
under consideration here today, as well
as the ones this body has passed previously, all bear the hallmarks of the
America First agenda. They meet the
priorities of the President and the priorities of the American people. They
make sizeable contributions to America’s strong posture of defense, our Nation’s systems of infrastructure, national security, and research and innovation within health.
As Chairman COLE has noted multiple times over, this process has been
Member-driven and deliberate, and I
wholeheartedly agree with that. I will
also add that this process and the monumental victories that we have
achieved thus far signal a fundamental,
positive change within this legislative
body, a change we should take note of
and celebrate.
Let’s finish out this process and deliver this final tranche of appropriations bills across the finish line.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentlewoman for yielding me
the customary 30 minutes, and I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
First, Mr. Speaker, let me thank the
staff on the Rules Committee, both the
majority and the minority staff, because they put up with an awful lot.
The way this House is being run, the
process and procedures, are absolutely
awful.
Mr. Speaker, I would say that this is
a clown show, but that would be an insult to actual working clowns who
probably lost their healthcare in the
big, ugly bill that Republicans passed,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

but whatever. This is not the way this
House of Representatives should be
run.
Out of the four appropriations bills
before us, only one, the Defense bill,
was given an amendment process,
where the majority issued a call for
amendments.
Overall, 9 out of the 12 appropriation
bills this cycle did not receive any call
for amendments. In other words, nobody was asked to offer amendments to
participate in this process. They were
told that their views and their opinions
didn’t matter.
Last week, Republicans made in
order 2 out of 78 amendments submitted to the two-bill minibus that we
considered. Again, neither of those
amendments had a call for amendments prior. The week before, Republicans made zero amendments in order
on a three-bill minibus out of 40 submitted. Only one of those bills had an
amendment process prior.
Today, they are making 2 amendments in order out of the 164 amendments submitted to the final appropriation bills before us. They were submitted by Democrats and by Republicans, so 99 percent of those amendments that were offered have been
blocked.
The Republicans went on last night
about regular order, but they only solicited amendment ideas on 3 out of the
12 appropriation bills that fund our
government. Give me a break. This is
not the way this place is supposed to be
run.
Again, I get it. They are worried
about pleasing the rebels within the
Republican Conference who always
threaten to bring down a rule if they
don’t get what they want, so I assume
that is what happened by making two
Republican
amendments
in
order
today.
b 0930
Here is another thing that I noticed
in this bill. There is this creation of an
ethanol domestic energy council,
aimed at kind of buying off people from
Iowa, I guess. In the rule, it says this
council will be appointed by the Speaker of the House to develop legislative
solutions to address the crisis facing
our Nation’s farmers and refiners.
I asked in the Rules Committee
whether the Speaker would only appoint Republicans. The answer was
that you can submit whatever you
want to the Speaker. It is his decision,
but we don’t know. So, I don’t know
whether this is a bipartisan council or
just a partisan council.
A question was asked in the Rules
Committee: Will it only be Members of
Congress on this council, or could
members of industry or the energy
companies be on this council? We were
told that they think it is just Members
of Congress, but we don’t know.
I mean, I don’t know. Those are pretty relevant questions, and this is kind
of being tossed in here essentially to
buy people’s votes.

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Here is the deal: To those Republicans who are being bought off by this
creation of this new council, let me recall back in September when we were
having a debate on whether to kind of
extend the pause on Trump’s terrible
tariffs. All of a sudden, we were told
that we had to pause the vote. We went
on and on and on for a while, waiting
and waiting and waiting, and then we
were told that there would be a special
trade working group established. The
press reported that Congressman ADRIAN SMITH, who is the head of the Ways
and Means Trade Subcommittee, would
be the head of that working group, and
they would address the issue of tariffs.
They said it would be a thoughtful
process.
Mr. SMITH was before the Rules Committee the other day, and I asked him
about this trade working group that
apparently bought off Republican
votes, Republicans who were concerned
about the tariffs. I asked him who the
Members are on this trade working
group. He said that he talks to all
Members. I asked who the Members are
on this trade working group, and he
didn’t have an answer. Do you know
why? They never appointed anybody to
be on the trade working group.
I asked him how many hearings,
gatherings, and meetings this trade
working group has had. He couldn’t answer that because they never had any
meetings. I asked if there were any
publications or reports that have been
produced by this trade working group,
and he couldn’t answer that because
there were none.
Now, we are being told—now, Republicans who are kind of concerned about
the issue of ethanol are being told that
we are going to create this council for
you, this new working group for you,
and you should be happy.
I am just going to say this, with all
due respect to my Republican colleagues: Those of you who are bought
off by this in order to vote for this
rule, where I come from, we have a
name for that, and that is ‘‘cheap
date’’ because that is what this is. At
the end of the day, nothing—nothing—
will end up happening.
I am just going to say one other
thing before I get into the substance of
these bills. When I was the chairman of
the Rules Committee, I made nearly
half of all amendments in order. This
Republican majority has blocked 80
percent. That means Democrats—and,
by the way, a lot of Republicans, a majority of Republican amendments have
been blocked. Let me say that one
more time. A majority of Republican
amendments have been blocked.
I don’t know what is wrong with
Members over there, but come on, a
majority of Republican amendments
have been blocked, and you continue to
go along to get along. They are not
just blocking us. They are blocking
their own Members. There have been
106 closed rules so far in this Congress,
more than Democrats had in the entire
Congress the last time we were in
charge.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.008

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

Again, I know you have a slim majority, but here is another fact that you
ought to let sink in: We have had the
fewest votes on the floor in 35 years. I
mean, that is what this Congress is all
about.
Again, I would just say, as somebody
who loves this institution, who believes
in this institution—and I know many
of my Republican colleagues feel the
same way—I mean, things have to
change.
This place has become an institution
where trivial issues get debated passionately and important ones not at
all. All the issues that I hear about in
my townhalls—the high cost of
healthcare, rising food prices, the high
cost of utilities—we don’t talk about
those things here.
We are dealing with messaging bills.
When it comes to anything of substance, like these appropriations bills,
we are basically told to take it or leave
it, that our views don’t matter. Again,
this is not just Democrats, but Republicans, as well.
Mr. Speaker, again, I am grateful for
the hard work of the appropriators and
their staffs. These bills are complicated, and the hours are brutal. In
this political climate, getting anything
done, let alone in a bipartisan way, is
no small thing.
While no bill is perfect, I agree with
the chairwoman that there are provisions in this package that would make
a difference in people’s lives, and I
think, in some cases, in a positive way.
The three-bill minibus—Labor-HHSEducation, Defense, and Transportation-HUD—rejects President Trump’s
proposed $163 billion in cuts. It continues funding for priorities like medical research, NIH, opioid response
grants, childcare, and Head Start. It
includes badly needed funding to hire
more than 2,500 air traffic controllers.
Democrats blocked more than 40 poison-pill riders that Republicans tried
to jam in on reproductive care, vaccines, sanctuary cities, and more. I
thank Ranking Member DELAURO for
holding the line and keeping that garbage out.
I want to talk about something bigger than the line items because, in my
view, these bills are being written as if
we are still operating under rules that,
let’s be honest, this current administration does not recognize. The President has shown over and over again
that he won’t follow the rules. He
treats the law like a suggestion. He
treats Congress like an obstacle. He
treats the Constitution like it is optional.
When we respond with business as
usual, that isn’t responsible. It is
naive. If we don’t build in real guardrails, strong, enforceable guardrails,
then we are not just funding programs,
but we are handing over power. We are
writing checks and crossing our fingers
that an administration that is proud of
breaking the rules will suddenly decide
to behave.
Here is the perfect example: This
three-bill minibus increases defense

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1179

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

spending by more than $8 billion above
the President’s own budget request, yet
it does nothing to rein in this administration’s recent illegal military actions around the world, nothing that
makes clear that Congress and not the
President decides when America goes
to war.
The same kind of blank-check governing is also present in the Homeland
Security bill. Let’s not mince words:
ICE is out of control. We are watching
Federal agents roll through communities like they are above the law:
stopping people, harassing people, intimidating them, and, yes, shooting
them.
That is not America. That is not
freedom. It sure as hell is not what our
parents and our grandparents fought
for.
We have history in this country. We
know exactly where ‘‘show me your papers’’ leads. We know what it looks
like when a government decides that
certain people don’t belong and then
builds an enforcement machine to terrorize them into submission.
Yet, here we are, being asked to hand
DHS more money with nowhere near
the due diligence or the ironclad accountability that this moment demands. Hell, Republicans already supercharged DHS with $75 billion in
their big, ugly bill last year. Now, we
are supposed to keep feeding the beast?
I say hell no. I don’t think ICE deserves a single cent more, which is why
I am voting ‘‘no.’’
I will acknowledge the work that
went into these bills. I will acknowledge some provisions that could help
people, but I do not trust this President. I do not trust Trump’s OMB. I do
not trust this administration, which
has made lawlessness a habit, to follow
the intent of Congress just because we
typed it into statutory language.
Call it Trump derangement syndrome, as some of my Republican
friends have labeled it. I call it learning from experience. I call it paying attention. This is our last real leverage
point. Once we fund it, once we sign
the checks, the power shifts. With this
President, that is terrifying because he
is erratic and lawless.
b 0940
We tried to put up guardrails. We offered amendments to rein him in. The
Republicans all voted them down,
every single one of them. They voted
against accountability, and they voted
against constraints. It is crazy. It tells
you everything you need to know, Mr.
Speaker. They would rather give him a
blank check than do their job as a coequal branch.
Mr. Speaker, I urge a ‘‘no’’ on this
rule, and I reserve the balance of my
time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the
President.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, this is the
most targeted process in two decades.

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

We got the Senate to do its job. I will
stack this process up against that of
the Democrats when they controlled
the process and let the public decide.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from Florida (Mr. WEBSTER).
Mr. WEBSTER of Florida. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentlewoman for yielding time.
Mr. Speaker, we are on the brink of a
historic moment. This is a day I have
worked toward for a long time.
Throughout my time here, I have
fought for legislative reforms that will
restore a Member-driven process. This
is the most Member-driven, principled
process in Congress in my time here.
I ran for office pledging to restore fiscal responsibility and Congress is embracing it.
For years, I have urged my colleagues to reject the Washington presumption that nothing can be cut from
the budget in order to fund priorities
without increasing the deficit.
Mr. Speaker, by the end of this week,
Congress will have passed 12 individual
appropriation bills that both fund critical priorities while also reducing
spending. This is a great moment.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
2 minutes to the gentlewoman from
Texas (Mrs. FLETCHER).
Mrs. FLETCHER. Mr. Speaker, as the
House considers this rule and the legislation it advances, I rise to remind all
who are present in the Chamber, all
Members of this body, and every person
in this country that the Fourth
Amendment to the United States Constitution states: ‘‘The right of the people to be secure in their persons,
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall
not be violated, and no warrants shall
issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be
searched, and the persons or things to
be seized.’’
Yet, all across America, from Maine
to Minnesota to California and everywhere in between, hardworking, lawabiding people in the United States,
American citizens, are living in fear of
exactly this. They are afraid to go to
work, afraid to go to church, afraid to
go to school, afraid to go to the hardware
store
because
unidentified,
masked agents, often in plain clothes
and unmarked cars, are breaking down
doors to their homes, are pulling people from their cars, are stopping people
on the street, and asking them to show
their papers and prove they belong
here.
This is not only unconstitutional. It
is un-American, and this Congress
must do something to stop it. Brave
Americans are standing up and saying
no all across this country. We have to
do that here, we have to do it now, and
it starts by voting ‘‘no’’ on this rule.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, Democrats continue to
attack ICE agents in their operations.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.009

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1180

Instead of debating the complexities of
arrest or the nuances of reasonable suspicion, Democrats are instead attacking their authority, their dignity, and
their work at large. That is beyond unfortunate as ICE agents are arresting
some of the worst criminals imaginable.
During the first year of the Trump
administration, ICE arrested 7,000 gang
members from America’s streets. This
includes a criminal illegal alien from
Venezuela, an active gang member. The
perpetrator’s rap sheet includes arrests
for homicide, assault, cruelty toward
children, domestic violence, and damaged property. He entered the U.S. in
2022 and was released by the Biden administration. ICE arrested him on February 28, 2025, and the Trump administration removed him on September 12,
2025.
ICE arrested a criminal illegal alien
from Cambodia, a Crips gang member,
who was convicted of homicide, robbery, and battery. He was released into
the U.S. by the Biden administration.
ICE arrested him on March 4, 2025, and
removed him on April 2, 2025.
ICE also arrested a criminal illegal
alien from Cuba and Bloods gang member, who was convicted for multiple
homicides and burglary. ICE arrested
him on October 27, 2025, and removed
him on January 6, 2026.
Beyond gang members, ICE has arrested some of the worst perps imaginable, including a 20-year-old citizen
of Guatemala who was filming a child
being raped.
Mr. Speaker, despite all of this, ICE
law enforcement is facing a 1,300 percent increase in assaults against them,
a 3,200 percent increase in vehicle attacks, and an 8,000 percent increase in
death threats.
If Democrats want to debate the new
Supreme Court interpretations of reasonable suspicion, let’s do it. If they
want to debate the very authorities of
ICE stretching back decades over both
Republican and Democrat administrations, let’s do that. If they want to
have concrete debates about the authorities or changes of laws, let’s do
that. But we should not attack the
operational decisions that are directed
to one goal and one goal only: keeping
Americans safe and upholding our immigration laws.
We enforce our immigration laws, or
they are meaningless. We either grant
ICE the mission of fulfilling its mandate, or we don’t. We either give them
the support they need to confront,
stand face-to-face, and arrest the
world’s worst criminals, or we don’t.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the gentlewoman just listing off a bunch of
criminals, and we don’t take issue with
arresting violent criminals. Violent
criminals should not be on our streets
no matter where they are born, and
they should face justice. But the issue

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

is that ICE is terrorizing communities
and attacking people, including U.S.
citizens.
In Minnesota, a U.S. citizen said ICE
took him at gunpoint in his underwear,
without a warrant, in front of his 4year-old grandchild.
In another instance, a U.S. citizen
went on his lunch break, and masked
Federal agents detained him in a choke
hold.
In Miami, Federal agents ripped a
woman from her car as she screamed
that she was a U.S. citizen.
ICE agents in Minnesota ate lunch in
a small-town Mexican restaurant.
When they were done enjoying their
meal, they detained two workers who
served them.
In California, a U.S. citizen on his
way to work at a food bank pulled over
to warn Federal agents that they
should wrap up their stop of another
individual before school-age children
gathered for the bus. Moments later,
an ICE officer shot him in the back.
In Chicago, ICE agents stormed an
apartment complex by helicopter as
families slept and deployed chemical
agents near a public school.
Mr. Speaker, ICE is wreaking havoc
on people all over this country, trampling over the constitutional rights of
U.S. citizens at every turn. U.S. citizens across the country are carrying
their passports out of fear of being detained without cause.
There are reports of Native Americans who are U.S. citizens being detained by ICE. Thirty-two people have
died in ICE custody in 2025—32. It was
ICE’s deadliest year in over two decades.
In just the first 9 months of Trump’s
second term, over 170 U.S. citizens were
detained by ICE, and nearly 20 were
children. Two dozen were held without
being able to call lawyers or their family. These citizens have been dragged,
tackled, beaten, tased, and shot by immigration agents.
b 0950
Mr. Speaker, I can go on and on and
on. Let me be clear. This is an out-ofcontrol agency at war with communities around the country. They don’t
give a damn if you are a U.S. citizen.
The silence on the other side of the
aisle is outrageous, as if this is no big
deal. Wait until it happens to you or a
loved one.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from North
Carolina (Mr. EDWARDS).
Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in support of the rule. The appropriations bills need to be passed for fiscal year 2026 Defense; Homeland Security; Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education; and Transportation, Housing, and Urban Development.
For the first time in years, Congress
is approaching the finish line of passing all 12 appropriations bills in a

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

transparent and timely manner, reclaiming our constitutional power of
the purse.
As we approach our Nation’s 250th
anniversary, this body can take pride
in governing as our Founders intended
and building a future that is more secure, resilient, and prosperous.
Last November, the American people
sent us here with a clear mandate to
put America first. This package delivers through critical investments in
border security, national infrastructure, and stronger support for our servicemembers and their families.
In North Carolina’s 11th District,
these funds support essential water and
public safety projects including a new
EMS base in Swannanoa, water and
sewer upgrades at Swain Middle
School, an emergency services hub in
Madison County, upgraded water lines
in Robbinsville, and a new taxiway on
the west side at Asheville Regional
Airport.
Following Hurricane Helene, these
investments aid recovery, eliminate
the uncertainty of short-term extensions, and give local leaders the confidence to plan ahead. This is a return
to responsible governance, and I am
proud to support it. I ask Members to
please support this rule.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
I urge we defeat the previous question. If we do, I will offer an amendment to the rule to bring up S.J. Res.
88, which would allow for an up-ordown vote on whether to terminate
President Trump’s global tariffs.
Mr. Speaker, on April 2 of last year,
President Trump announced he was opposing tariffs on virtually all countries, including our closest allies like
the United Kingdom, the European
Union, Japan, Norway, and Taiwan—
the list goes on—based on a bogus national emergency.
He called it ‘‘liberation day.’’ Let me
tell you that the only liberation my
constituents have felt is money being
liberated from their hard-earned paychecks because the price of basically
everything has gone up since Donald
Trump took office.
The price of beef has risen 16.4 percent over the last year. The price of
coffee is up a whopping 19.8 percent.
The price of lettuce is up 7.3 percent.
Frozen fish is up 8.6 percent. In total,
families paid $310 more for groceries
during President Trump’s first year in
office compared to 2024.
It is now abundantly clear that
President Trump broke his promise to
lower costs on day one, in large part
due to his cost-increasing tariffs. Although the President and his cronies
claim that these tariffs are paid by foreign governments, in reality, it is the
American people who pay the tariffs.
According to a newly published
study, which analyzed $4 trillion in
shipments over the past year, American consumers and importers paid 96
percent of the cost of tariffs, while foreign companies shouldered a measly 4
percent of the cost.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.011

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

Last October, more than 2 ⁄ months
ago, the Senate sent to the House on a
bipartisan basis this joint resolution to
terminate the global tariffs. In this
House, our Republican majority has
continued to block a simple up-or-down
vote. They have basically endorsed the
increase in the cost of living for average people.
Speaker Johnson promised his Members that he would create a working
group to address the tariffs. We now
know this tariff policy working group
is a mirage. It doesn’t exist. You got
taken.
When I ask the Republican chairman
of the Ways and Means Subcommittee
on Trade about the working group,
which he was supposedly in charge of,
he said he didn’t know who was on it or
whether or not it had ever met.
Are you serious? Are you serious?
Most Republicans, even the ones who
oppose the tariffs in private, are continuing to go along to get along with
this.
When are Republicans who know better going to stand up against this crazy
tariff policy that is raising costs at
home and destroying our alliances? It
is never too late to do the right thing.
By voting to defeat the previous question, we can finally have an up-or-down
vote in this body on whether to terminate President Trump’s disastrous
global tariffs.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to insert the text of my amendment into the RECORD, along with any
extraneous
materials,
immediately
prior to the vote on the previous question.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
GOLDMAN of Texas). Is there objection
to the request of the gentleman from
Massachusetts?
There was no objection.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, to discuss our proposal, I yield 2 minutes to
the gentleman from New York (Mr.
MEEKS), the ranking member of the
Committee on Foreign Affairs.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, we should
vote today to end these tariffs and
lower costs for everyday Americans.
Instead, this House majority is paralyzed by fear, making it one of the
least effective in modern American history.
The American people sent us to
Washington to address affordability
and to lower the cost of healthcare,
housing, and groceries. Yet, this Congress has taken fewer votes in 2025 than
in any nonpandemic year this century.
Apparently, the majority doesn’t
think
affordability
is
important
enough to vote on. Instead of focusing
on prices, the White House has spent
the past week talking about invading
Greenland or using our taxpayer dollars to buy an island that isn’t for sale.
To advance this fantasy, President
Trump threatened yet another round of
tariffs that would raise prices even further, only to walk back the threats
after the stock market tanked yesterday.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1181

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
12

Jkt 069060

Regardless of what the President
does, we are a coequal branch of government. We should be addressing affordability right now by passing the
resolutions I have offered and resolutions that have already passed the Senate to terminate these tariffs.
When asked to explain why we are
not doing everything we can to lower
costs for American families, the Speaker responded that the President is exercising Article II powers to impose tariffs. There is only one problem. The
President has no Article II powers to
tax or tariff. Those powers are explicitly assigned to the United States Congress under Article I of the Constitution.
The Republican majority is more interested in providing cover for Donald
Trump than honoring their oath to the
Constitution of the United States and
deliberately avoiding doing its job to
lower costs for Americans.
Mr. Speaker, the American people
are watching. The camera of history is
recording. I urge my colleagues to defeat the previous question and demand
a vote on terminating the tariffs.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, President Trump has
reset our standing in the global market
after decades of failed and unfair trade
deals put the American economy last.
Swift and decisive action has brought
scores of countries to the negotiating
table and numerous new trade deals including with the U.K., the EU, Japan,
Australia, Korea, El Salvador, Vietnam, Guatemala, and Malaysia, just to
name a few. These trade deals will help
grow the economy, protect the American workers, and reassert our global
standing.
Our friends have selective memory.
Let’s remember: When President Biden
took office about 5 years ago, he left
President Trump’s tariffs from his first
term largely in place. We didn’t hear a
peep from our colleagues then. In fact,
many of them advocated for keeping
those tariffs and embraced the Biden
decision.
President Trump is simply doubling
down on that successful approach. It
seems the deciding factor for Democrats’ newfound opposition is grounded
in Trump derangement syndrome.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentlewoman from Oklahoma (Mrs.
BICE).
b 1000
Mrs. BICE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
in strong support of the rule to consider the final four fiscal year 2026 appropriations bills.
These appropriations bills, like the
previous eight that came before it, are
fiscally responsible and represent a return to regular order. The deliberate
and Member-driven approach of this
process is a testament to the leadership of my friend and fellow Oklahoman, Chairman TOM COLE.
This package will strengthen American military superiority and fund the

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E–7 Wedgetail program at Tinker Air
Force Base. It also ends open-border
policies of the Biden era, champions
measures to make America healthier,
and allows the Nation to build stronger, travel safer, and support future
growth.
Through late nights and long markups, the Appropriations Committee has
done its job, reduced spending, delivered wins for our constituents, and
codified the priorities of the Trump administration.
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the work
that the Appropriations Committee has
done, and I encourage my colleagues to
support the rule.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
2 minutes to the gentlewoman from
Texas (Ms. JOHNSON).
Ms. JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Speaker,
I rise in opposition to the Department
of Homeland Security funding bill. I
cannot support funding for a Department that has shown repeated disregard for the Constitution, the rule of
law, and the safety of the people it is
supposed to protect.
Mr. Speaker, I remind the American
people and this body: Every Member of
Congress has sworn an oath to uphold
the Constitution. That means all aspects of it—the Fourth Amendment,
the Fifth Amendment, the rights of due
process, and the rights of unwarranted
search and seizure. Yet, we are failing
at this moment because ICE is terrorizing the American people and violating constitutional rights every single day.
We have seen ICE agents and the Department of Homeland Security detain
and arrest American citizens without
any justification, enter homes without
warrants, use excessive force when it
wasn’t required, and ignore constitutional rights.
They are even weaponizing children
in this country, kidnapping them from
schools and using them as weapons
against their parents. It is morally
wrong, outrageous, and not who we are
as a common people.
This is a Department that is out of
control, going rogue, and needs to be
reined in. These are not isolated incidents. They are the result of unchecked
power and a complete lack of accountability.
Last night, I offered commonsense
amendments to impose basic constitutional guardrails: accountability for
abuse, due process protections, and
civil recourse when rights are violated.
Republicans refused to even consider
them.
Without these amendments, this bill
gives DHS and ICE free rein to operate
unchecked and unaccountable while
Republicans in this body continue to
look the other way.
The American people deserve better.
They deserve safety without fear, enforcement without lawlessness, and a
government that follows the Constitution.
Mr. Speaker, until the Department of
Homeland Security is willing to operate within the rule of law, I cannot

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.013

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1182

support continued funding without
meaningful reform. I urge my colleagues to vote ‘‘no.’’
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3
minutes to the gentleman from Iowa
(Mr. NUNN).
Mr. NUNN of Iowa. Mr. Speaker, I
thank Chairwoman FOXX for the incredible work of the Rules Committee.
I know we worked through the night on
something that is very important.
That is ethanol—E15, to be specific.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today on behalf of
the farmers, families, and small businesses in Iowa’s Third District and,
really, rural communities across America right now who need someone to be
a fighter.
We have a good group here in Washington on both sides of the aisle who
are championing the importance of renewable biofuels, giving Americans the
freedom to choose cleaner, more affordable, American-made fuel at the pump.
That fuel is E15. E15 is simply gasoline blended with up to 15 percent ethanol, or corn. Ethanol is grown, produced, and refined right here in the
United States, often in towns and communities where agriculture is the backbone of the local economy, where every
dollar spent at the co-op, in the grain
elevator, and at the plants and refineries that support it is directly invested back into the families and communities that produce it.
Authorizing year-round E15 nationwide, a free market approach that is
American-made, benefits not only
farmers but consumers, the environment, and our national security.
Approximately 33 percent of all U.S.
corn produced is used for ethanol, so
imagine this the next time you drive
down the road: a cornfield where every
third row goes toward helping to fuel
this Nation.
Permanent E15 could boost corn demand by up to 2.4 billion bushels annually. It would increase our domestic
market access for corn farmers and
support viability for farmers, manufacturers, and our community.
E15 clearly saves up to 30 cents per
gallon. E15 provides higher octane for
better engine performance. E15 is vital
for national independence, especially
in light of national conflicts.
The Nationwide Consumer and Fuel
Retailer Choice Act of 2025 aims to authorize year-round E15 sales nationwide to eliminate the annual uncertainty of whether it can be completed.
This legislation that we are leading
adds to the billions of dollars that
could be grown right here in the U.S.
economy. It saves every American, and
if you come to Iowa right now, at the
local Casey’s, it is $1.85 per gallon.
That is a pretty good return on investment for your family’s minivan or your
truck.
Mr. Speaker, right now, Iowa farmers
see this not as an abstract policy but a
direct threat. This is about demand for
their crops, stability for markets, and
the ability to plan for the next season
without wondering whether Wash-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

ington will pull them out of their challenges or pull the rug out from under
them by failure to act. For Iowa families, this is about affordability.
E15 consistently costs less than
standard gasoline. At a time when families are watching every dollar, and
this House is supposed to be focused on
affordability and cost savings, this is a
direct win. For our country, this is energy independence, but what is more, it
is national security for all of us.
Every gallon of ethanol blended in
our fuel supply is a gallon that we
don’t have to buy from overseas. It
means less reliance on unstable foreign
markets and more reliance on American farmers, American workers, American innovation, and American families.
It is good for our economy. It is good
for our Nation. E15 is a must-pass bill.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself 2 minutes.
Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman
for raising an issue that he got a working group on—a working group that
may meet or not meet, may have members or may not have members, and
may do something or may not. Boy,
wow, that is something.
Mr. Speaker, today, I recognize someone who has quietly made this place
work day after day and vote after vote.
Ray Salazar is leaving the House after
more than 11 years of service to this institution and to the Democratic Caucus. I want to say plainly and on the
record that we are thankful for his
service.
Ray started here the way that a lot
of great public servants start: by showing up, doing the work, and earning
trust. From an internship with Congresswoman Colleen Hanabusa, to Whip
HOYER’s AmeriPAC, to becoming a special assistant to the Office of the
Democratic Whip, Ray learned this
place from the ground up.
Ray then served as floor assistant for
Whip HOYER, floor director for Leader
HOYER, and deputy floor director and
senior adviser. Most recently, he has
been floor director for the Democratic
Whip, KATHERINE CLARK, helping Members to navigate the toughest moments, the longest days, and the most
important votes.
For the Rules Committee specifically, Members and staff relied on Ray
for many, many years. Whether it was
getting information about the floor at
1 o’clock in the morning or helping to
solve tricky procedural problems, he
has been a reliable and valued part of
the Rules family.
He is a graduate of Hawaii Pacific
University with a background in international relations, national security,
and advanced military education focused on joint warfare. He understands
the world. He understands the institutions. He understands that democracy
runs on people who do the hard work,
the unglamorous work.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Ray for his professionalism, his steadiness, and his
service. We will miss him on the floor,

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

and we wish him nothing but success as
he begins his next chapter.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I also thank
Mr. Salazar for his work and, actually,
all the staff who work so hard around
this Capitol. We are very blessed.
Mr. Speaker, I understand that Mr.—
I am going to say this in a second—Mr.
MCGOVERN is ready to close, and I am
ready to close. I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, after all the time that
we spend together, the gentlewoman
can just call me Jim.
Mr. Speaker, let me close with this:
Republicans are running this place like
a clown show. Over and over again,
House Republican leadership shuts
down the amendment process. Over and
over again, they limit debate. Over and
over again, they tell Members to take
it or leave it.
Mr. Speaker, 80 percent of all amendments were blocked. We had to have
the Speaker up in the Rules Committee
this morning because, apparently, the
only way Republicans can get their
amendments made in order around here
is by blackmailing the Speaker and
threatening to take down the rule.
b 1010
Last night, we had Members showing
up with serious amendments, amendments aimed at basic accountability,
basic guardrails, basic limits on a lawless administration. The leadership’s
answer is no, one structured rule for
the minibus making in order two Republican amendments. Homeland is a
closed
rule
entirely—no
accountability, no guardrails, no nothing.
That is not how the people’s House is
supposed to work, and it is especially
dangerous right now because this is not
a normal administration. This President has shown he will say one thing
and then do another. He will assure
Congress and then ignore Congress.
Now, we are supposed to pass funding
bills without ironclad guardrails on
what this administration can do with
that money, whether it is foreign adventurism, whether it is some halfbaked scheme about Greenland, or
whether it is building out a domestic
secret police force that treats human
beings like trash.
Let’s be honest. If you cannot trust
an administration to follow the law,
then you don’t give them a blank
check. That is exactly what this process risks doing.
I want to see this House do its job. I
want Members on both sides to be able
to offer amendments, to debate them,
and to vote on them. I want to see real
constraints to prevent taxpayer dollars
from being used to violate rights, to
trample the Constitution, or to fuel an
agency like ICE that is behaving like it
answers to nobody.
I urge my colleagues: Do not
rubberstamp a process that shuns accountability. Don’t enable an administration that ignores Congress. Don’t

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.015

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

pretend that normal rules can contain
abnormal lawlessness.
Mr. Speaker, I urge a ‘‘no’’ vote on
this rule, and I yield back the balance
of my time.
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself the balance of my time, and I
thank the gentleman from Worcester.
Mr. Speaker, for months, bipartisan,
bicameral negotiations and collaboration have been underway. They have
yielded consistent, consecutive appropriations products that deliver upon
the Nation’s highest priorities.
I applaud Chairman COLE and Ranking Member DELAURO, as well as other
appropriators, and especially their
staff, for the time they have invested
in these 12 appropriations bills. It is
time to get them across the finish line
and stamp our seal of approval on
them.
In a moment, I will offer an amendment to the rule that would repeal the
Senate’s Arctic Frost payout provision.
The House has previously considered
this under suspension by a vote of 427–
0. This vote reflects a bipartisan consensus.
I cannot overstate how wholly inappropriate it was that the Senate included this provision in the continuing
resolution to reopen the government
late last year. We must strike down
this provision immediately. American
taxpayers should not be on the hook
for this inappropriate payout.
Mr. Speaker, it is time to bring this
process to a close. It is time that we return this legislative body to regular
order and move forward with our work.
I urge my colleagues to vote ‘‘yes’’ on
the previous question and ‘‘yes’’ on the
rule.
AMENDMENT OFFERED BY MS. FOXX

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I offer an
amendment to the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Clerk will report the amendment.
The Clerk read as follows:
Strike section 2 of the resolution and insert the following:
‘‘Sec. 2. Upon adoption of this resolution it
shall be in order to consider in the House the
bill (H.R. 7147) making further consolidated
appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes.
All points of order against consideration of
the bill are waived. The amendment specified
in section 7 of this resolution shall be considered as adopted. The bill, as amended, shall
be considered as read. All points of order
against provisions in the bill, as amended,
are waived. The previous question shall be
considered as ordered on the bill, as amended, and on any further amendment thereto,
to final passage without intervening motion
except: (1) one hour of debate equally divided
and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Appropriations or their respective designees; and
(2) one motion to recommit.’’.
At the end of the resolution, add the following:
‘‘Sec. 7. The amendment referred to in section 2 of this resolution is as follows:
‘At the end of the bill (before the short
title) add the following:
SEC. ll. REPEAL OF SENATE NOTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS
RELATING
TO
LEGAL PROCESS ON DISCLOSURES
OF SENATE DATA.

Section 213 of title II of division C of the
Continuing
Appropriations,
Agriculture,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1183

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Legislative Branch, Military Construction
and Veterans Affairs, and Extensions Act,
2026, and the amendments made by such section, are hereby repealed and shall have no
force or effect.’ ’’.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentlewoman from North Carolina is recognized on the amendment.
The text of the material previously
referred to by Mr. MCGOVERN is as follows:
AN AMENDMENT TO H. RES. 1014 OFFERED BY
MR. MCGOVERN OF MASSACHUSETTS
At the end of the resolution, add the following:
SEC. 7. Immediately upon adoption of this
resolution, the House shall proceed to the
consideration in the House of the joint resolution (S.J. Res. 88) terminating the national
emergency declared to impose global tariffs.
All points of order against consideration of
the joint resolution are waived. The joint
resolution shall be considered as read. All
points of order against provisions in the
joint resolution are waived. The previous
question shall be considered as ordered on
the joint resolution and on any amendment
thereto to final passage without intervening
motion except: (1) one hour of debate equally
divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on
Foreign Affairs or their respective designees;
and (2) one motion to commit.
SEC. 8. Clause 1(c) of rule XIX and clause 8
of rule XX shall not apply to the consideration of S.J. Res. 88.

Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, I yield back
the balance of my time and move the
previous question on the amendment
and on the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on ordering the previous
question on the resolution and on the
amendment.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, on
that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question will be postponed.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess for a period of less than 15 minutes.
Accordingly (at 10 o’clock and 16
minutes a.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1030
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker pro
tempore (Mr. MCDOWELL) at 10 o’clock
and 30 minutes a.m.
f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Proceedings will resume on questions previously postponed. Votes will be taken
in the following order:

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Ordering the previous question on
House Resolution 1014 and on the
amendment offered by the gentlewoman from North Carolina;
Adoption of the amendment offered
by the gentlewoman from North Carolina, if ordered; and
Adoption of House Resolution 1014, if
ordered.
The first electronic vote will be conducted as a 15-minute vote. Pursuant
to clause 9 of rule XX, remaining electronic votes will be conducted as 5minute votes.
f

PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 7148, CONSOLIDATED APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026; AND
PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 7147, DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026; AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on ordering
the previous question on the resolution
(H. Res. 1014) providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 7148) making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; and providing for consideration of the bill
(H.R. 7147) making further consolidated
appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other
purposes; and for other purposes, and
on the amendment offered by the gentlewoman from North Carolina; on
which the yeas and nays were ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on ordering the previous
question.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 215, nays
213, not voting 3, as follows:
[Roll No. 39]
YEAS—215
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.017

H22JAPT1

Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood

Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa

H1184
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Murphy
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat

Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—213

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McCormick
McDowell

Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)

Jkt 069060

Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell

Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood

Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—3
Hunt

McClintock

Stefanik

b 1106
Messrs.
SCHNEIDER
and
WALKINSHAW changed their vote
from ‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’
Messrs. TURNER of Ohio and
GRAVES changed their vote from
‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the previous question was ordered.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on adoption of the amendment offered by the gentlewoman from
North Carolina (Ms. FOXX).
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 427, nays 0,
not voting 4, as follows:
[Roll No. 40]
YEAS—427
Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Alford
Allen
Amo
Amodei (NV)
Ansari
Arrington
Auchincloss
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Balint
Barr
Barragán
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Beatty
Begich
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Bergman
Beyer
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Bishop
Boebert
Bonamici
Bost
Boyle (PA)
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Burchett
Burlison
Bynum
Calvert

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Cammack
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (GA)
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Ciscomani
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Cline
Cloud
Clyburn
Clyde
Cohen
Cole
Collins
Comer
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davidson
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
Dean (PA)

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
DesJarlais
Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Emmer
Escobar
Espaillat
Estes
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fields
Figures
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Fletcher
Flood
Fong
Foster
Foushee
Foxx
Frankel, Lois
Franklin, Scott
Friedman
Frost
Fry
Fulcher

Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gill (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Goldman (TX)
Gomez
Gonzales, Tony
Gonzalez, V.
Gooden
Goodlander
Gosar
Gottheimer
Graves
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Griffith
Grijalva
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hayes
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houchin
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Hudson
Huffman
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jack
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
James
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Kennedy (UT)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Krishnamoorthi
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Langworthy
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Letlow
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.006

H22JAPT1

Lofgren
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Lynch
Mace
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mannion
Massie
Mast
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McCaul
McClain
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McCormick
McDonald Rivet
McDowell
McGarvey
McGovern
McGuire
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Messmer
Meuser
Mfume
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Min
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Murphy
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Nehls
Newhouse
Norcross
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ocasio-Cortez
Ogles
Olszewski
Omar
Onder
Owens
Pallone
Palmer
Panetta
Pappas
Patronis
Pelosi
Perez
Perry
Peters
Pettersen
Pfluger
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Reschenthaler
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Ross

Rouzer
Roy
Ruiz
Rulli
Rutherford
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scalise
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schmidt
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Schweikert
Scott (VA)
Scott, Austin
Scott, David
Self
Sessions
Sewell
Sherman
Shreve
Simon
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smith (WA)
Smucker
Sorensen
Soto
Spartz
Stansbury
Stanton
Stauber
Steil
Steube
Stevens
Strickland
Strong
Stutzman
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Taylor
Tenney
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Wagner
Walberg
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Whitesides
Wied
Williams (GA)
Williams (TX)
Wilson (FL)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

January 22, 2026
NOT VOTING—4
Hunt
Jackson (TX)

McClintock
Stefanik

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There are 2 minutes remaining.
b 1114
Messrs. MIN and EMMER changed
their vote from ‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the amendment was agreed to.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the resolution, as
amended.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
RECORDED VOTE

Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I demand a recorded vote.
A recorded vote was ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—ayes 214, noes 213,
not voting 4, as follows:

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

[Roll No. 41]
AYES—214
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak

Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1185

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Murphy
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise

Jkt 069060

Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Steil

Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden

Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NOES—213
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen

Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez

Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—4
Harris (MD)
Hunt

McClintock

Stefanik

b 1152
So the resolution, as amended, was
agreed to.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Ms. STEFANIK. Mr. Speaker, I was absent
for the first three votes today, due to delays in
returning to Washington. Had I been present,
I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 39,
YEA on Roll Call No. 40, and AYE on Roll
Call No. 41.
f

EXPRESSING SUPPORT FOR THE
DESIGNATION OF MAY 2025 AS
‘‘RENEWABLE FUELS MONTH’’ TO
RECOGNIZE
THE
IMPORTANT
ROLE THAT RENEWABLE FUELS
PLAY IN REDUCING CARBON IMPACTS, LOWERING FUEL PRICES
FOR CONSUMERS, SUPPORTING
RURAL
COMMUNITIES,
AND
LESSENING RELIANCE ON FOREIGN ADVERSARIES
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
NEWHOUSE). Pursuant to section 6 of
House Resolution 1014, H. Res. 375, as
amended, is considered adopted.
The text of the resolution is as follows:
H. RES. 375
Resolved, That the House of Representatives—
(1) Establishes the Rural Domestic Energy
Council (‘‘Council’’), appointed by the
Speaker of the House, to develop legislative
solutions to address the crisis facing our nation’s farmers and refiners.
(2) Directs the Council to investigate topics including, but not limited to, the sale of
Ethanol-15, U.S. refinery capacity, the Renewable Fuel Standard Program, Renewable
Identification Numbers, access to markets,
and federal regulations that hinder American energy dominance.
(3)Directs the Council to meet regularly to
develop legislative solutions and to submit
those solutions to congress no later than
February 15, 2026, with the intent to consider
legislation no later than February 25, 2026.
f

CONSOLIDATED APPROPRIATIONS
ACT, 2026
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may
have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and to include extraneous material on H.R. 7148, and
that I may include tabular material on
the same.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Oklahoma?
There was no objection.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 1014 and rule
XVIII, the Chair declares the House in
the Committee of the Whole House on
the state of the Union for the consideration of the bill, H.R. 7148.
The Chair appoints the gentlewoman
from Illinois (Mrs. MILLER) to preside
over the Committee of the Whole.
b 1154
IN THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

Accordingly, the House resolved
itself into the Committee of the Whole
House on the state of the Union for the

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.007

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1186

consideration of the bill (H.R. 7148)
making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes,
with Mrs. MILLER of Illinois in the
chair.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The CHAIR. Pursuant to the rule, the
bill is considered read the first time.
General debate shall be confined to
the bill and shall not exceed 1 hour
equally divided and controlled by the
chair and ranking minority member of
the Committee on Appropriations or
their respective designees.
The gentleman from Oklahoma (Mr.
COLE) and the gentlewoman from Connecticut (Ms. DELAURO) each will control 30 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Oklahoma (Mr. COLE).
Mr. COLE. Madam Chair, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
I rise today in support of H.R. 7148,
the Consolidated Appropriations Act.
The legislation before us is part of
the final chapter of the fiscal year 2026
appropriations process. This is where
months of hard work turn into results.
You see, we aren’t here for just another stopgap, temporary fix. We are
here to finish the job by providing fullyear funding. Specifically, this package addresses core areas of national
consequence: Defense, Labor-HealthEducation, and Transportation-Housing and Urban Development.
These aren’t abstract concepts on a
page. They affect how Americans live,
work, learn, and travel every day. That
matters because behind every line is an
impact: a military family with more
certainty in their budget, a senior depending on a rural hospital, a student
pursuing technical training for a goodpaying job, and a traveler trusting that
the plane they board will land safely.
These bills were written with those priorities in mind.
Our Defense bill sends a clear message: America’s military will remain
the strongest in the world. It restores
deterrence by strengthening readiness,
modernizing capabilities, and reinforcing the defense industrial base. The
bill also supports our servicemembers
with a well-earned pay raise. Together,
these investments ensure our forces
can deter conflict and win decisively if
deterrence fails.
The Labor-HHS title invests in the
long-term strength of the country. We
support lifesaving biomedical research,
strengthen workforce training, and expand access to care, particularly in
rural communities. These investments
help students gain skills, workers find
opportunities, and communities stay
healthy.
Through Transportation-Housing and
Urban Development, we keep America
moving. From roads and bridges to
ports and skies, the bill strengthens
the safety and reliability of vital transit systems. It modernizes air traffic
control, supports the hiring of needed
controllers, and accelerates the deployment of new technologies. It also em-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

powers local communities through programs that promote economic development and provide housing assistance to
vulnerable Americans.
This package reflects a nation that is
strong, prepared, and ready for the future. These are real deliverables and
real wins.
This process has underscored a very
important point: Congress can make
tough decisions that are necessary to
govern this country and chart a bold
course with President Donald Trump.
Our objectives were clear, and we followed through. Republicans set out to
spend less, and the total FY26 funding
does just that. We committed to codifying DOGE cuts, and these bills cut
waste and rein in government bloat.
We promised to deliver America’s agenda, which is why we put President
Trump’s priorities in place and end the
Biden-era mandates. This is what responsible governance looks like.
I commend the detailed work of our
chairmen—Representatives
ROBERT
ADERHOLT, KEN CALVERT, and STEVE
WOMACK—whose stewardship ensured
this package was both thoughtful in
substance and built to deliver results.
I thank their accompanying ranking
members—Representatives
ROSA
DELAURO,
BETTY
MCCOLLUM,
and
JAMES CLYBURN—for their support and
hard work.
I also want to recognize the dedicated staff whose work made this possible, particularly our chief clerk,
Susan Ross.
This measure is the product of sustained engagement and serious legislating. It advances reforms, delivers
full-year funding, and reflects a Congress doing its job.
I thank each Member for their time,
and I urge all Members to support this
bipartisan measure.
Madam Chair, I reserve the balance
of my time.
b 1200
Ms. DELAURO. Madam Chair, I yield
myself 5 minutes.
Madam Chair, I rise in support of the
measure before us today, which includes
the
Labor-HHS-Education,
Transportation-Housing and Urban Development, and the Department of Defense appropriations bills.
I will begin by thanking Ranking
Member BETTY MCCOLLUM and Ranking
Member JIM CLYBURN for their fine
work on the Defense and Transportation bills, respectively. Both bills are
remarkably strong agreements that
serve as testaments to their tenacity
as negotiators. I also thank Chairman
CALVERT and Chairman WOMACK and
my counterpart on the Labor, Health
and Human Services, Education, and
Related
Agencies
Subcommittee,
Chairman ADERHOLT, for his partnership in reaching a strong agreement on
our bill, as well.
None of this would have been possible
without the incredible work of the
committee staff. In particular, Stephen
Steigleder, Jennifer Chartrand, Chris-

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

tina Monroe, Jackie Kilroy, Laurie
Mignone, Philip Tizzani, Nora Faye, Ed
Etzkorn, and Jason Gray.
Lastly, I express my appreciation for
my friend and counterpart on the full
committee, Chairman COLE, and the
majority staff.
This package is a strong, bipartisan,
bicameral agreement that rejects the
Trump administration’s efforts to eviscerate public services and reasserts
Congress’ power of the purse.
It rejects efforts to dismantle the Department of Education, instead providing $79 billion in funding for K–12
education programs, financial aid, support for students with disabilities, and
much more.
It redoubles our efforts in investments in biomedical research, increasing NIH funding by $415 million, and
supporting efforts to develop treatments and cures for cancer, Alzheimer’s, ALS, and other deadly diseases.
It provides more than $9 billion for
the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention to protect and promote our
Nation’s public health. It increases
funding for SAMHSA to provide mental
health support and to advance our battle against addiction.
This bill supports families feeling the
squeeze from the cost-of-living crisis
by investing in affordable housing and
protecting funding for rental assistance as the cost of housing continues
to climb. These and other efforts will
prevent more than 4 million American
households from being evicted.
Additionally, this package provides
funding for a 3.8 percent pay raise for
the brave men and women who serve
our country in uniform. It increases
funding for medical research by $1.7
billion, supporting research to develop
treatment for diseases and service-related injuries. At a time of international uncertainty, this bill shores
up support for our European allies and
does not include any additional funding
for operations in Venezuela or the Caribbean.
You can measure the success of these
negotiations by the distance between
what was initially proposed and what
was ultimately agreed to. When you
look at the numbers, it is astonishing.
In the Labor-HHS bill alone, we rejected more than $50 billion in proposed
cuts. The Transportation-Housing bill
provides $46 billion more than the
White House had proposed. There are
over 50 programs across these two bills
that Republicans proposed to outright
eliminate but are ultimately funded in
this package. I consider that a success.
In addition, this package contains
important provisions to rein in the
Trump administration. It provides
funding levels, removing ambiguity
that the White House has sought to exploit in the past. It establishes deadlines for required spending, provides
minimum staffing thresholds to prevent agencies from being hollowed out,
and increases notification requirements to ensure the administration is

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.028

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

complying with the laws that Congress
makes.
I am proud of the work that was done
on these bills, and I encourage my colleagues to support this package.
Madam Chair, I reserve the balance
of my time.
Mr. COLE. Madam Chair, I yield 4
minutes to the gentleman from Alabama (Mr. ADERHOLT), my very good
friend and distinguished chairman of
the Labor, Health and Human Services,
Education, and Related Agencies Subcommittee of the Appropriations Committee.
Mr. ADERHOLT. Madam Chair, I rise
today, again, as my colleagues have, to
ask for support for the final FY26 appropriations package. It completes the
culmination of a lot of hard work from
a lot of folks who fulfilled their commitment to the American people.
As chairman of the Subcommittee on
Labor, Health and Human Services,
Education, and Related Agencies, I was
honored to lead the effort to rein in
spending and secure an America First
future, while also ensuring that these
bills provide for funding for critical
projects and growth around our districts.
I thank Chairman COLE for his longstanding leadership on the Labor-HHS
bill and express my appreciation for
Ranking Member DELAURO, who tirelessly champions her priorities and so
many things in this bill. It is an honor
to work with both of them as we have
moved this bill forward.
The bill on the floor today balances
the need for responsible fiscal stewardship while maintaining key investments in biomedical research, schools,
and public health.
Thanks to negotiations on a bicameral, bipartisan level, funding decisions have moved through a very deliberate, very Member-driven process that
puts an emphasis on transparency, accountability, and timely consideration.
This bill demonstrates the will of the
American people who want new priorities and accountability in government, including priorities that make
America healthy again and make
America skilled again.
Investments in this bill are directed
to where they matter most: into lifesaving biomedical research and resilient medical supply chains, classrooms,
and training that prepare the next generation for success.
Enactment and passage of this fullyear appropriations bill is vital to implementing provisions that keep our
Nation strong, secure, and competitive.
In closing, I thank Chairman COLE
and Ranking Member DELAURO, again.
I also equally thank the committee
staff on both sides of the aisle, majority and minority.
For the majority: Kathryn Salmon,
James Redstone, Emily Goff, Kirk
Boyle, Jaime Varela, along with Megan
Medley on my staff, who has worked
very diligently on this bill, as well.
For
the
minority:
Stephen
Steigleder, who has already been men-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1187

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

tioned but needs to be mentioned
again, Philip Tizzani, Laurie Mignone,
and Jackie Kilroy.
There are so many others that we
could name, but those are the folks
that were on the front line.
Madam Chair, I urge my colleagues
to support this bill. This is a good bill.
Ms. DELAURO. Madam Chair, I yield
4 minutes to the gentleman from South
Carolina (Mr. CLYBURN), the distinguished ranking member of the Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies Subcommittee.
Mr. CLYBURN. Madam Chair, I
thank Ranking Member DELAURO and
Chairman COLE for their leadership.
Madam Chair, I rise in strong support
of this bipartisan legislation that will
make critical investments in housing
and transportation across America.
As ranking member of the Transportation and Housing Appropriations
Subcommittee, I will first thank my
partner, Chairman STEVE WOMACK, for
his leadership and collaborative relationship this year.
As many of you know by now, Chairman WOMACK lost his wife this past
Sunday as we were closing out this bill.
He remained by his wife’s side during
the extremely difficult time, while ensuring we walked away from the negotiation table with a product we can feel
proud about.
Madam Chair, having been through
that which Chairman WOMACK is experiencing,
I
am
encouraged
and
emboldened by his commitment to get
this bill across the finish line while
managing his affairs back home.
The Transportation and Housing division of this bill includes $113 billion
in discretionary spending. This represents an $11 billion increase in the
House Republican bill and is $43 billion
more than the President’s budget request.
The bill reflects a renewed commitment to addressing the cost-of-living
crisis and improving the safety of our
transportation systems. For housing,
the bill prevents the eviction of more
than 4 million low-income households
served through HUD’s rental assistance
programs, including those currently
served by Section 8 and public housing.
b 1210
Madam Chair, the bill reinforces efforts to combat homelessness by increasing funding for the Homeless Assistance Grants by $366 million, rejecting the Trump administration’s efforts
to eliminate Continuum of Care funding entirely.
It protects investments for mayors
and governors by providing $3.3 billion
for the popular Community Development Block Grants, or CDBG, and sustains funding for the HOME program at
$1.3 billion, which spurs affordable
housing construction.
It includes $58 million for housing
counseling assistance for renters and
first-time homebuyers and $8 million
to continue legal aid assistance for
eviction prevention.

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

For transportation, the bill invests
in the safety of the flying public by increasing FAA operations by nearly $230
million, enabling the hiring of 2,500
new air traffic controllers.
It increases funding for the air traffic
control towers and facilities by $824
million above fiscal year 2025, a 26 percent increase.
The CHAIR. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Ms. DELAURO. Madam Chair, I yield
an additional 1 minute to the gentleman from South Carolina.
Mr. CLYBURN. Madam Chair, it protects investments for continuing Amtrak service along the Northeast Corridor and national network by providing $2.4 billion.
It allocates $3.7 billion in Transit
Capital Investment Grants that improve commute times and reduces congestion on our roads.
It includes $100 million for the 2026
World Cup and $94 million for the 2028
Olympics to help transit agencies manage local transportation in support of
games across the country.
In closing, this year’s Transportation
and Housing bill advances investments
in our housing and transportation infrastructure, while increasing safety
and housing security.
Before I close, I thank the staff on
both sides of the aisle for their immeasurable contributions to this bill.
The CHAIR. The time of the gentleman has again expired.
Ms. DELAURO. Madam Chair, I yield
an additional 30 seconds to the gentleman from South Carolina.
Mr. CLYBURN. Madam Chair, this
includes Christina Monroe, Jackie Kilroy, and Nora Faye, along with
Barvetta Singletary on my personal
staff. It also includes Doug, Avery, Andrew, and Mary Beth with the majority.
Madam Chair, I urge my colleagues
to support this bill.
Mr. COLE. Madam Chair, I thank my
friend from South Carolina (Mr. CLYBURN) for his gracious remarks.
Madam Chair, I yield 5 minutes to
the gentleman from Arkansas (Mr.
WOMACK), my very good and distinguished friend, the chairman of the
Transportation, Housing and Urban Development Subcommittee of the Appropriations Committee, and a person who
is here at an extraordinarily difficult
time to discharge his responsibilities
to the United States.
Mr. WOMACK. Madam Chair, I rise in
support of the consolidated appropriations package before the House today.
With this legislation, we are a step
closer to completing full-year appropriations that rightsize our priorities
with updated funding levels.
As chair the Transportation, Housing
and
Urban
Development
Subcommittee, I would like to highlight
that division of this package.
Before I do, Madam Chair, I want to
say something about my friend, JIM
CLYBURN. He is my friend. Though we
sometimes differ in our political beliefs, friendship transcends politics.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.029

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1188

Jim’s words this morning on the floor
inspire me. I am grateful.
Madam Chair, the Transportation division is a deliberate shift away from
bloated bureaucracy and unfocused
spending and back toward the core responsibilities of the Federal Government.
This agreement supports the President’s America First agenda by cutting
waste, eliminating unnecessary and
underperforming programs, and codifying reforms that significantly reduce
the size and scope of the Federal bureaucracy across all agencies.
The bill refocuses taxpayer dollars on
priorities that matter to the American
people: safety, mobility, economic
growth, and housing affordability.
We make aviation safety a top priority by providing $22.2 billion for the
Federal Aviation Administration, fully
funding air traffic control, hiring 2,500
new controllers, and modernizing outdated facilities and equipment to ensure the safety and reliability of our
national airspace system.
We invest more than $64 billion in
highways, with the overwhelming majority sent directly to the States by
formula because we know that it is the
States, not Washington, that are best
positioned to deliver roads and bridges
that improve safety, strengthen freight
movement, and support local economies.
The bill also addresses longstanding
safety challenges including truck parking and motor carrier enforcement.
At the same time, we preserve housing assistance for the most vulnerable,
while promoting affordability through
flexible, locally driven programs that
allow communities to expand housing
supply without the micromanagement
of the Federal Government.
We protect seniors, people with disabilities, and families facing homelessness, while ensuring that these programs are managed responsibly. We
don’t just throw money at programs.
We make sure that they are responsibly managed.
Just as importantly, this bill exercises strong oversight by eliminating
funding for failed and mismanaged
projects like California High-Speed
Rail, reducing transit programs, and
rightsizing staffing levels at HUD and
the Department of Transportation, all
without compromising safety or mission effectiveness.
While I am extremely proud of the
Transportation division, I would be remiss if I didn’t express my strong support for other divisions of the package,
notably providing for the common defense, a constitutional imperative. This
legislation
strategically
increases
funding to ensure our military continues to be the most lethal in the
world.
It supports programs like the F–35
FMS mission at Ebbing Air National
Guard Base in Fort Smith, Arkansas,
and the E–7 Wedgetail, both of which
ensure our military and allies have the
capabilities they need to deter threats

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

across the globe. Of course, we have a
well-deserved pay raise for our servicemembers.
This bill does what Congress should
have been doing all along. It prioritizes
national security and the men and
women who voluntarily take the oath
to defend it.
This legislation also makes investments in biomedical research. We don’t
create cures or develop medical breakthroughs. No, that is not our job, but
we can implement policies here in
Washington that provide the resources
needed to support our experts.
Moreover, this agreement provides
the fiscal discipline and commonsense
investments that are not mutually exclusive. It cuts what doesn’t work,
funds what does, and delivers real results for the taxpayers.
Madam Chair, finally, I will say this
about TOM COLE. He has re-engineered
the appropriations process. I am eternally grateful. We have strayed away
from our fundamental duty of funding
the government. In his desire to make
sure that the appropriations process is
honored and effective, TOM COLE made
sure that we arrived at this moment. I
am grateful.
The CHAIR. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. COLE. Madam Chair, I yield an
additional 1 minute to the gentleman
from Arkansas.
Mr. WOMACK. Madam Chair, before I
close, let me say, as most of my colleagues know and as Mr. CLYBURN
pointed out, my presence here today in
the face of a terrible, personal hardship—the loss of my wife of over 41
years—I hope is indicative of the importance of completing the work on behalf of the American people.
b 1220
Madam Chair, that is our job. I am
grateful for the outpouring of support
from Members from both sides of this
aisle, and I urge a ‘‘yes’’ vote on the
legislation.
Ms. DELAURO. Madam Chair, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Madam Chair, before I introduce my
next speaker, I will say that it is an
honor to serve in this institution with
Chair WOMACK, and he understands why
we are here and what we are about. He
has demonstrated that at great personal cost.
The gentleman said something about
friendship. In this body, friendship
needs to transcend whatever political
difficulties or differences that we have,
and he is an extraordinary individual,
someone who I call my friend, and I am
pleased to do that.
We all are in support of whatever his
needs are now and for the future. He is
an incredible human being, and I am
proud to know him.
Madam Chair, I yield 4 minutes to
the gentlewoman from Minnesota (Ms.
MCCOLLUM), the distinguished ranking
member of the Defense Subcommittee.
Ms. MCCOLLUM. Madam Chair, it
was a very rough appropriations cycle

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

at times, so I thank Mr. COLE and Ms.
DELAURO for leading us through this
and for making sure that our government does not shut down again. I
thank them both for their work.
Madam Chair, the staff lost their holiday break and time with their families
to get this bill done. Particularly, I
thank Jennifer, Jason, Ed, and in my
personal office, Ben and Lisa, for all of
the work that they did.
I also thank Adam Sullivan and the
entire majority staff. A special shoutout to Bill Adkins for his work and
dedication to our national security.
Bill recently departed to work at the
National Reconnaissance Office, and we
all wish him well.
Madam Chair, a special warm thank
you to Chairman CALVERT for working
in a bipartisan manner to get this Defense bill done. As always, legislation
is a compromise, but I am glad that the
harmful partisan riders have been removed.
We know that this process would go
much more quickly without having to
debate them each year. This bill does
include several important provisions to
support military personnel and their
families. It includes a well-deserved 3.8
percent pay increase. Medical research
programs have been increased with a
total of $100.7 billion, and that includes
nearly $1.3 billion for congressionally
directed medical research programs.
That is an increase of $620 million
above last year.
These programs are important. They
support efforts to develop lifesaving
treatments for cancer, disease, and
other service-related injuries, and
these advances in medical research and
knowledge will improve healthcare and
outcomes for our entire civilian population.
This bill makes $400 million in funding available to Ukraine, and I strongly believe that we should continue to
support our Ukrainian allies.
I am also pleased that this bill does
not include additional funding to cover
operations in the Caribbean and Venezuela. Congress needs to do more to
rein in the President’s military interventions that have not been authorized
by Congress. We should pass a Venezuelan War Powers Resolution to do
just that.
The bill also contains language to reaffirm our ironclad support in Congress
for our NATO allies and all 32 members. That includes Denmark and, especially, my good neighbor to the north,
Canada.
I am disappointed that we were unable to include stronger language making it clear that President Trump
needs to keep Greenland free. The future of Greenland is up to its people,
the Kingdom of Denmark, not the
President of the United States.
Madam Chair, this bill has been negotiated in good faith and in a very bipartisan way. I urge Members to support
it.
Mr. COLE. Madam Chair, I yield 4
minutes to the gentleman from California (Mr. CALVERT), my very good

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.031

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

friend and distinguished chairman of
the Defense Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations.
Mr. CALVERT. Madam Chair, I
thank Chairman COLE for yielding.
Madam Chair, we cannot thank
Chairman COLE enough, as Chairman
WOMACK said, for his steadfast leadership and his clear-eyed purpose to get
us back to regular order and to see this
end today with the passage of four final
appropriations bills.
Madam Chair, I thank my partner,
BETTY MCCOLLUM, for her hard work
and her leadership on her side of the
aisle to get this done. It was not an
easy process, but we were able to work
together to make sure that the men
and women who serve in the United
States military have reliable funding
to keep this country moving forward.
Madam Chair, I rise today in strong
support of this bill, the Department of
Defense Appropriations Act for Fiscal
Year 2026. This legislation was a bipartisan effort by all four corners of Defense Appropriations.
Today, our country faces a dangerous
and increasingly complex threat environment. China continues to advance
its military capability at an unprecedented rate. While bloodied, Russia and
Iran continue to threaten Europe and
the Middle East. Until 1 year ago, our
unsecured borders facilitated the flow
of illicit drugs into this country, killing thousands of Americans.
This legislation answers the call, providing $839.2 billion for the Department
of Defense and the intelligence community to protect America and deter war.
This bill protects the administration’s
America First defense agenda, supports
the Department’s innovation efforts,
and includes my four key priorities.
First, this bill builds a technologyequipped fighting force to ensure that
we remain the strongest military in
the world. It enhances investments in
the fifth and sixth-generation aircraft,
including the F–35, the F–47, and the F/
A-XX.
This bill supports and prioritizes the
modernization of the nuclear triad
through investing in the B–21 Raider,
the Columbia-class submarine, and the
Sentinel ICBM.
It supports the Department’s innovative efforts to increase efficiency and
production of critical munitions. It
also provides $7.1 billion to sustain the
Navy ship operations and fund 17 new
ships, including 7 battle-force ships, to
include 1 Columbia-class ballistic missile submarine, 2 Virginia-class fast attack submarines, 3 medium landing
ships, and 1 antisubmarine warfare
ship. This bill also provides approximately $13.4 billion in support of other
Golden Dome efforts.
Second, this bill advances innovation
efforts, increases competition, and
drives down costs to create a more efficient and effective Department of Defense.
This bill includes a $1.2 billion reduction for efficiencies and to streamline
management functions, and it cuts $1.2

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1189

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

billion to support the administration’s
effort to reshape the civilian workforce. Furthermore, the bill delivers a
3.8 percent pay raise to our heroic military servicemembers and provides $6
billion to transfer authority to help
support an agile execution of the administration’s military priorities.
Third, this legislation combats international actors who are manufacturing
and trafficking illegal drugs into this
country. The bill provides $1.1 billion
for counterdrug programs. It includes
funding for the National Guard
Counterdrug Program and maintains
the current location for United States
Southern Command headquarters, a
signal of our Nation’s sustained commitment to the Western Hemisphere.
Finally, this legislation prioritizes
modernization, innovation, and the industrial base. It provides $18.8 billion
for facility sustainment, restoration,
and modernization to sustain installations, public shipyards, and other facilities.
This bill supports commercial/dualuse technology and innovative projects
by providing $429.5 million for the Defense Innovation Unit, $400 million for
the Accelerate the Procurement and
Fielding of Innovative Technologies, or
APFIT.
It includes robust funding to establish the Civil Reserve Manufacturing
Network and almost $98 million for the
Office of Strategic Capital to facilitate
over $4.3 billion in loans and loan guarantees for critical suppliers to scale
public capacity.
This bill includes an investment in
future defense industrial base, which
has languished.
The CHAIR. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. COLE. Madam Chair, I yield an
additional 1 minute to the gentleman
from California.
Mr. CALVERT. Madam Chair, finally, in closing, I thank my entire
staff both on the majority side and the
minority side who worked diligently
together. As the ranking member mentioned, we are losing one of our key
staff members who went over to NRO
as a deputy director, Bill Adkins. I am
sure he is going to do a great job in his
continued service for the United
States.
b 1230
Ms. DELAURO. Madam Chair, I yield
2 minutes to the gentlewoman from
Florida (Ms. LOIS FRANKEL), the distinguished ranking member of the Subcommittee on National Security, Department of State, and Related Programs.
Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida.
Madam Chair, I rise today in strong
support of the 2026 Labor-HHS appropriations bill. It represents a clear and
moral statement of our national priorities, that we invest in people, in their
health, in their education, and in their
opportunity to work and thrive, and it
lowers the cost of living for everyday
people.

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The legislation strengthens the National Institutes of Health with new
funding for cancer research, Alzheimer’s
treatment,
ALS
breakthroughs, and women’s health.
It keeps our promise to families with
more help for childcare and Head Start,
ensuring that parents can work and
children can grow and learn in safe,
nurturing environments.
It invests in mental health and substance abuse, boosting the 988 Suicide
and Crisis Lifeline, and expanding
opioid response programs, because
every life saved is worth the effort and
investment.
It reaffirms our commitment to education, protecting title I schools, preserving Pell grants, and supporting career and technical education so young
Americans are prepared for the jobs of
tomorrow, regardless of their ZIP Code.
This bill reaffirms Congress’ power of
the purse and our duty to the American
people.
It is not just a spending bill. It is a
values bill. It says the health and wellbeing of our citizens is imperative. It
invests in America’s greatest resource,
our people, by funding cures, creating
opportunity, and making the lives of
everyday Americans more affordable.
Mr. Chair, I urge my colleagues to
support this very good bill.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from
Oklahoma (Mrs. BICE), my very good
friend, my fellow Oklahoman, and the
distinguished vice chair of the Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing
and Urban Development, and Related
Agencies of the Committee on Appropriations.
Mrs. BICE. Mr. Chair, I rise in strong
support of H.R. 7148, which contains
the Defense, Labor-Health and Human
Services-Education,
and
Transportation-Housing and Urban Development appropriations bills.
This is a strong package, and as the
vice chair of the Subcommittee on
Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies, or THUD, I am particularly proud of that
portion of this bill. It provides $103 billion in budget authority and supports
President Trump’s America First agenda. It invests in transportation infrastructure and housing affordability
while cutting wasteful spending and reducing the Federal bureaucracy. In
fact, this bill codifies DOGE cuts, like
reducing HUD staff by 24 percent and
DOT by 5 percent, helping to rightsize
the Federal workforce.
When it comes to aviation safety, a
top priority, FAA funding is increased
to $22.2 billion, including $10.3 billion
for air traffic control operations, $4 billion to modernize facilities and equipment, and additional resources to hire
2,500 new air traffic controllers. This
will help keep America’s skies safe.
The bill also invests $64 billion in
highway infrastructure, including $879
million for priority needs, such as addressing truck parking shortages and
resources needed to improve Tribal
transportation.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.033

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1190

The package supports housing affordability and community development by
providing $3.3 billion for the Community Development Block Grants and
$1.25 billion for the HOME program,
giving States and localities flexible
tools to expand affordable housing.
It also eliminates waste, including
$929 million from the failed California
High-Speed Rail project, which has
been totally mismanaged and is completely indefensible. Nearly $1 billion
in Biden-era Green New Deal spending
is redirected to critical infrastructure
needs. This is welcome news for taxpayers across the country.
Finally, and most importantly, this
bill delivers direct wins for Oklahoma’s
Fifth District, including fully funded
runway improvements at the Chandler
and Shawnee Regional Airports and
critical electric grid upgrades in Edmond, Oklahoma.
The Acting CHAIR (Mr. WALBERG).
The time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I yield an additional 15 seconds to the gentlewoman
from Oklahoma.
Mrs. BICE. Mr. Chair, I urge passage
of this bill.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from
Pennsylvania (Ms. DEAN), a member of
the Appropriations Committee.
Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania. Mr.
Chair, I thank Ranking Member
DELAURO and Chairman COLE, and my
sincere sympathies to Chair WOMACK
and his family on the passing of his
beautiful wife.
Mr. Chair, I rise today in support of
the negotiated fiscal year 2026 appropriations package for Labor-Health and
Human Services-Education, for Defense, and for Transportation-Housing
and Urban Development.
As a new member of the Subcommittee on Labor, Health and
Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies, I am pleased to have
contributed to the development of this
legislation. I thank my colleagues on
the Committee on Appropriations and
the dedicated staff for their tireless
work.
Despite serving in the minority,
Democrats on the Committee on Appropriations have spent months fighting back against the Trump administration’s proposed cuts to critical programs that support our healthcare systems and save lives. These efforts have
made a difference.
We secured $7.4 billion for the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, SAMHSA, despite
the administration’s callous attempt
just 1 week ago to eliminate almost all
discretionary grant funding for the
agency. I am pleased to say that Congress exercised its constitutional power
of the purse and rejected cuts to an
agency that serves as the backbone of
our Nation’s response to the mental
health and addiction crises, which continue to take too many lives in America.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

We restored funding for homeless prevention programs, peer support services, and mental health workforce
training, and we secured funding increases for State opioid response
grants and the 988 Suicide and Crisis
Lifeline.
In addition, we successfully removed
more than 20 partisan policy riders
from the L-HHS bill, riders that would
have defunded Planned Parenthood,
blocked gun violence prevention research, and threatened the safety and
dignity of immigrant and LGBTQ communities.
These bills are far from perfect, but
they send a strong message to this administration: Make America Healthy
Again cannot coexist with attempts to
cut public health programs, and Congress will continue to assert our power
of the purse and impose necessary
checks on the administration.
The Defense and T-HUD portions of
this bill also make important investments toward our public health.
The Acting CHAIR. The time of the
gentlewoman has expired.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentlewoman from Pennsylvania.
Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania. The Defense bill restores funding for Congressionally Directed Medical Research
Programs of $1.3 billion following massive cuts in fiscal year 2025. Further, it
includes over $100 million for PFAS remediation efforts at military installations.
The T-HUD bill includes $295 million
for Lead Hazard Reduction and Healthy
Homes grants.
More generally, we know housing is
healthcare. This bill provides $74 billion in discretionary spending for housing programs.
Mr. Chair, I urge my colleagues to
join me in supporting this package, and
I thank the chairman and the ranking
member.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 21⁄2
minutes to the gentleman from Florida
(Mr. SCOTT FRANKLIN), my very good
friend and the vice chair of the Subcommittee on Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies of the Committee on Appropriations.
Mr. SCOTT FRANKLIN of Florida.
Mr. Chair, I rise today in strong support of H.R. 7148 and the Defense appropriations bill as part of this broader
spending package.
Last year, Congress failed our military by relying on a full-year continuing resolution. It froze funding at
outdated levels, delayed modernization, disrupted training schedules, and
undermined our ability to plan properly. With a yearlong CR, our military
cannot adapt, innovate, and effectively
deter our adversaries.
Congress did provide additional defense funding through the One Big
Beautiful Bill Act. It addressed urgent
needs and closed critical gaps, but onetime funding cannot replace stable,
predictable appropriations. Strategic

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

planning, force posture, training pipelines, and modernization all depend on
certainty, and Congress has a duty to
provide it.
We face real and growing threats.
China continues its rapid military expansion and aggressive posture in the
Indo-Pacific, while racing to dominate
emerging technologies. Russia is determined to destabilize its neighbors and
challenge the international order. Hostile actors continue to test American
resolve. Recent missions in Venezuela
and Iran underscore that these dangers
are not hypothetical.
Maintaining our edge requires sustained investment in advanced capabilities, including artificial intelligence. AI is transforming modern
warfare by accelerating decisionmaking, improving logistics, and enhancing force protection. Integrating
these technologies responsibly requires
long-term commitment, not short-term
fixes.
b 1240
This Defense appropriations bill provides the resources our military needs
to train, modernize, and remain ready
to deter and defeat our adversaries.
Passing it sends a clear message: Congress will not allow budgetary dysfunction or uncertainty to weaken America’s defense or embolden our adversaries.
Mr. Chair, we owe our servicemembers leadership, certainty, and the
tools they need to keep America secure. I urge my colleagues to vote
‘‘yes.’’
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Indiana
(Mr. MRVAN), a member of the Appropriations Committee.
Mr. MRVAN. Mr. Chair, I thank the
ranking member for the time.
I rise today because I believe the
Federal Government has a responsibility to stand with all communities
across northwest Indiana—big cities,
small towns, and neighborhoods—that
are rolling up their sleeves to rebuild
and create work and wealth for their
residents. I want to thank the leaders,
Chairman COLE and Ranking Member
DELAURO and the staff of the House Appropriations Committee for their hard
work, sacrifice, and also for including
three community project funding requests for Indiana’s First Congressional District.
The funding for the Gary/Chicago
International Airport is an investment
in jobs and economic growth for our region. The airport is a vital economic
hub for northwest Indiana. By expanding cargo operations, attracting private investment, and supporting initiatives pursued by the city of Gary and
the State of Indiana, this funding will
help bring new businesses, create goodpaying jobs, and open the door to new
passenger services for the residents.
I am also grateful for the HUD funding that will allow Gary and Michigan
City to tackle long-neglected vacant
and unsafe properties.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.035

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

This investment helps local leaders
do what they already committed to
doing by clearing blight, stabilizing
neighborhoods, and putting land and
buildings back to use. When we rebuild
housing and commercial corridors, we
strengthen communities and restore
local pride.
These are responsible investments
that respect taxpayer dollars and deliver real results for working families.
I urge my colleagues to support this
measure.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from Texas (Mr.
ELLZEY), my very good friend and vicechairman of the Defense Subcommittee
on Appropriations.
Mr. ELLZEY. Mr. Chair, I rise in
strong support of this bill and I join
Chairman CALVERT and Ranking Member MCCOLLUM in saluting the hard
work of the Defense Subcommittee
staff, and of course, Chairman COLE. I
thank my colleagues on the Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittee for
working with this body.
As of today, the Biden-era CRs, numbers, and policies will come to an end,
and we will pass a bill that addresses
the needs of now and the future for our
adversaries around the world.
This fiscal year ‘26 bill invests in the
Navy’s sixth-generation fighter, an essential high-tech platform designed to
succeed across the globe, projecting
power from highly mobile airfields—
the United States Navy’s aircraft carriers.
It also accelerates the Army’s investment in the Future Long-Range Assault Aircraft, a platform essential for
the Army to meet the fight in the long
distances between islands in the Pacific.
The Navy Reserve will finally get
four more KC–130Js to provide aerial
refueling, spare engines, and contested
logistics in the Pacific Ocean.
Some of the most important provisions in this bill help the Pentagon fix
many of its broken and antiquated
processes. It gives Secretary Feinberg
the ability to accelerate and find, test,
and buy the tools that warfighters
want and need, both hardware and software.
Remember, it was industrial innovations that won World War II, not a
fledgling Pentagon.
Today, patriotic companies across
the country are putting their own skin
in the game to help our country deter,
if possible, and defeat, if necessary, our
21st century adversaries, and we must
help them succeed.
Vote for this bill.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from New
Jersey (Mr. PALLONE), the distinguished ranking member of the Energy
and Commerce Committee.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Chair, I thank
Ranking Member DELAURO and Chairman COLE for their hard work.
I rise in support of this Consolidated
Appropriations Act. As Republicans
continue to slash healthcare, drive up

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1191

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

healthcare costs for millions of Americans, and double down on their big,
ugly bill that cuts a trillion dollars
from our healthcare system, Democrats are fighting to lower healthcare
and prescription drug prices for everyday Americans.
Today, we are finally considering priorities Democrats fought for, including
authorization of policies and increased
funding for important programs. Community health centers, hospitals that
care for underserved communities, and
teaching health centers will all benefit
from these Democratic initiatives in
the bill.
The healthcare package includes increased funding for the World Trade
Center Health Program, which will ensure our first responders and survivors
get the care and treatments we as a
Nation promised them.
Democrats also fought to lower prescription drug prices by cracking down
on unfair practices by pharmacy benefit managers, as well as guaranteeing
access to no-cost generic medications
for low-income seniors and people with
disabilities on Medicare.
This healthcare package had bipartisan support and was included in an
omnibus appropriation bill last year or
a year ago and was suddenly yanked by
Republicans because of a tweet by Elon
Musk when he was in the President’s
graces. I am glad to see it will finally
pass as part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act today.
Unfortunately, Mr. Chair, Republican
leaders refused to include the Affordable Care Act enhanced premium tax
credits in this bill, which passed the
House overwhelmingly earlier this
month. I urge our Senate Republican
colleagues to stop stalling and extend
the ACA subsidies immediately to
lower healthcare costs for millions of
Americans who are bearing the brunt
of the Republican healthcare crisis.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, may I inquire
as to how much time is remaining.
The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman
from Oklahoma has 61⁄4 minutes remaining.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I am prepared
to close, and I reserve the balance of
my time.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from Minnesota (Ms. CRAIG), the distinguished
ranking member of the Agriculture
Committee.
Ms. CRAIG. Mr. Chair, I thank the
gentlewoman for yielding. I want to
start by thanking my colleagues in the
Democratic Party who did everything
in their power to make these bills as
best they could under very difficult circumstances.
Over the past month, President
Trump has made it his mission to incite chaos and fear in Minnesota. He
has taken his quest for political retribution to our communities, and Minnesotans have paid the price.
Through President Trump and Kristi
Noem’s reckless and lawless ICE operations, the administration has targeted

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

communities of color, ripped families
apart, detained U.S. citizens, and made
it harder for law enforcement to do
their jobs. As a result, it has endangered every single Minnesotan.
Earlier this month, the President’s
political stunt got a Minneapolis mother, Renee Good, killed. That didn’t
prompt the President to withdraw ICE
or attempt to deescalate the unfolding
situation in our cities. Why? Because
escalation isn’t a symptom. It is the
whole point.
I won’t vote to give Kristi Noem’s
ICE one damn penny, but the truth is,
I refuse to play any part in this administration’s cruel and dangerous agenda.
While there are certainly some important provisions in these bills, and I
commend my colleagues for working to
get them to the place that I know we
are now, I can’t in good faith support
any funding package that enables this
administration in any way until ICE
de-escalates in Minnesota.
This is not how we operate in America. It is certainly not how we operate
in Minnesota. As Members of Congress,
we must do everything in our power to
fight this administration at every turn,
and that means using the power of the
purse to curb the President’s executive
authority.
I urge my colleagues in this body to
support me. Enough is enough.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I continue to
reserve the balance of my time.
The Acting CHAIR. Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in
personalities toward the President.
b 1250
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I yield 1
minute to the gentlewoman from Hawaii (Ms. TOKUDA).
Ms. TOKUDA. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in strong support of H.R. 7148 because for rural communities like mine
in Hawaii, this bill isn’t abstract policy. It is about whether people can get
care and whether caregivers can keep
going.
I have met grandparents caring for
grandchildren, parents caring for children with disabilities, and adult children caring for aging loved ones, often
with no backup and no break.
That is why the 5-year reauthorization of the Lifespan Respite Care Program in this bill, which I was proud to
co-lead
with
Representative
LANGWORTHY, matters so deeply. Respite care isn’t a luxury. It is the difference between a caregiver burning
out and a family staying together.
This bill also reauthorizes the Teaching Health Center GME program, the
National Health Services Corps, extends telehealth, and increases funding
for critical rural health programs.
Taken together, these investments will
grow the workforce, expand access to
care, and improve health outcomes.
Providers and patients need certainty now. Rural health systems are
fragile, and delays have real consequences. Passing this bill will change
lives and save lives, and we cannot afford to wait.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.037

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1192

Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I continue to
reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I am prepared to close, and I yield myself the
balance of my time.
Mr. Chair, I am proud, really, to support this funding package because I
think it reasserts Congress’ power of
the purse. I think the process of the
Appropriations Committee over the
last several weeks has indicated that
power of the purse resides in the Congress, and the appropriations process is
the implementation of that power of
the purse.
I commend the chair of the committee. It has been an honor to work
with him on reinstating the fact that
the Constitution says that that power
of the purse resides in the Congress and
that, again, we are the implementers of
that power. It rejects the Trump administration’s attempts to eviscerate
public services. It establishes guardrails to prevent executive overreach,
and it protects important priorities
that make our communities safer,
healthier, and more prosperous.
As the affordability crisis continues
to strain family budgets, this package
provides $8.8 billion for childcare and
development for that block grant, an
$85 million increase. Despite efforts by
the Trump administration to defund
and dismantle health research, this bill
boosts funding for the Office of Research on Women’s Health by $30 million, a roughly 40 percent increase.
While the cost of housing climbs and
rent prices reach untenable heights,
this bill invests more than $66 billion
in rental assistance programs, a forceful rejection of efforts by the Trump
administration to slash this funding by
50 percent.
As we work to provide stable and affordable housing for all those who need
it, this bill increases funding for homeless assistance grants by $366 million
and protects important housing programs like the Continuum of Care program from being unilaterally dismantled by this administration.
This bill increases funding for medical research programs at the Department of Defense, including $1.3 billion
for Congressionally Directed Medical
Research Programs. These are research
initiatives that help develop effective
treatments for service-related injuries
or conditions, as well as diseases like
cancer, Alzheimer’s, and Parkinson’s.
There are $1.2 trillion in Federal
spending accounted for in these bills,
and through lengthy, diligent, and
worthwhile negotiations, Democrats
and Republicans forged an agreement
that both sides can proudly stand behind. In an era of polarization, this is
no mean feat.
I am proud of my colleagues for their
work on both sides of the aisle to craft
this agreement. These are good bills,
and I encourage all of my colleagues to
support them.
I yield back the balance of my time,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself the balance of my time.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. Chairman, I want to begin by
thanking the gentlewoman, the distinguished ranking member of the full
committee. There are a lot of things we
disagree on, but we do not disagree on
the importance of the power of the
purse and the Article I responsibilities
of this Chamber.
My friend has worked tirelessly and
with great distinction and great effort
to find common ground and to reassert
the power of Congress and the appropriations process. We would not be at
the point we are today without all of
her hard work, all of her cooperation,
and all of her toughness in negotiation
as well, and the distinguished staff
that she leads. Again, I just want to
thank my friend for working with us to
get to this point.
Mr. Chairman, I think these are excellent bills, and I think they have
been written in a cooperative way between distinguished chairs and ranking
members of each of these subcommittees. They know their subjects, and
they work hard and well together.
My friend, the ranking member, and
I have a common philosophy. We try to
push decisionmaking as far down as we
can, because I can assure you, Mr.
Chairman, in each of the areas we have
discussed today: Defense, Transportation-Housing and Urban Development, and, of course, our third bill,
Labor-HHS, in all those areas, our subject experts are in the subcommittees.
They make the best decisions. Every
step up you go from there, Mr. Chair,
the less informed the decisionmaker is
and the more political the decision becomes.
I thank my friend for working with
me to make sure that most of these decisions were made by the members at
the subcommittee level. Only very
rarely did we have to intervene to solve
issues between us.
Again, it is good work, it is important work, it is bipartisan work, and it
is bicameral work.
I would also be remiss not to thank
our cooperating partners in the other
Chamber, SUSAN COLLINS of Maine, the
distinguished chair of the Senate Appropriations Committee, and her working partner, the distinguished ranking
member, PATTY MURRAY, of Washington. All four of us worked well together, and that is why we are at this
particular point.
Mr. Chairman, I urge my colleagues
to support this bill. It is a good bill. It
is a combination of three good bills.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Ms. LOFGREN. Mr. Chair, while I am supportive of provisions in the minibus that would
fund the Departments of Labor, Health and
Human Services, Education, Transportation,
and Housing and Urban Development, especially those pertaining to healthcare, I cannot
in good conscience endorse a spending bill
that continues to explode our Defense budget.
President Trump has already shown that he is
willing to use the military against American
citizens. He is also pursuing foreign entanglements around the globe, and I will not write

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 9920

him a blank check to potentially invade other
countries or pit America’s military against our
allies.
Ms. MCCOLLUM. Mr. Chair, I rise in support
of H.R. 7148, the FY2026 Consolidated Appropriations Act. Due to the perseverance of
my Democratic colleagues, the legislation before us today protects funding for Democratic
priorities, reasserts Congress’s power of the
purse, and rejects Republicans’ poison pill riders.
In the Labor, Health and Human Services,
and Education (LHHS-Ed) appropriations bill,
Democrats secured big wins for our public
health, our workforce, and our communities.
This bill provides a $400 million increase to
the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a $1.7
billion increase to the Centers for Disease
Control (CDC), and a $364 million increase to
the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), rebuking the
deep cuts made to these agencies in the Republican House bill. These dollars mean that
the United States will continue to provide the
world with cutting edge medical research, accurate data for health guidance and disease
prevention, and support services for those
who are struggling with their mental health or
substance use. It restores funding to several
programs that were eliminated by President
Trump and House Republicans, including:
Firearm Injury and Mortality Prevention Research, the Corporation for National and Community Service, the Department of Labor’s
Women’s Bureau, and valuable Title X Family
Planning funding. This bill increases funding
for Special Education, protects the Pell Grant,
and saves the Institute of Museum and Library
Science from closing. It increases funding to
Head Start, LIHEAP, and the Social Security
Administration, ensuring that from beginning to
end, Americans have the best chance at success from preschool to post-retirement.
The fiscal year 2026 Transportation, Housing, and Urban Development bill, which provides necessary funding to house our neighbors and build more affordable housing. The
agreement safeguards the Continuum of Care
program—a federal program that fosters a
community-wide commitment to ending homelessness—from Trump administration attacks
ensuring that members of our community are
not evicted by President Trump. The agreement also rejects the President’s proposal to
end the HOME Investment Partnerships Program. This is the sole federal program that
helps communities build more affordable housing for rent and ownership. Further, Division C
of this package funds the Department of
Transportation. The bill would ensure that the
Federal Aviation Administration can hire 2,500
new air traffic controller trainees to keep our
skies safe.
While I have already spoken on the House
floor in support of this package, I would like to
highlight a few provisions of the fiscal year
2026 Defense Appropriations agreement that I
helped negotiate. The bill includes several important provisions that support military personnel and their families, including a well-deserved 3.8 percent pay increase for our
troops. Medical research programs received
an increase in funding that will help support
lifesaving treatments for cancer, disease, and
service-related injuries to benefit our service
members and civilians alike. I am pleased that
the bill does not include additional funding to
cover the President’s illegal strikes in the Caribbean and Venezuela. More needs to be

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.039

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

done to reign in President Trump’s military
interventions. Finally, the bill reaffirms the ironclad support in Congress for the NATO alliance and all of its 32 member states, including
Denmark. I am disappointed that we were unable to include stronger language making it
clear that President Trump needs to keep his
hands off Greenland. The future of Greenland
is up to its people, and the Kingdom of Denmark, not the President of the United States.
While these bills were not in the shape that
I would have preferred, I am thankful that we
were able to come together in a bipartisan
manner to protect the American people from
President Trump’s most divisive cuts. I urge
my colleagues to support this bipartisan
agreement.
The Acting CHAIR. All time for general debate has expired.
Pursuant to the rule, the bill shall be
considered for amendment under the 5minute rule. The amendment printed
in part A of House Report 119–462 shall
be considered as adopted, and the bill,
as amended, shall be considered as
read.
The text of the bill, as amended, is as
follows:
H.R. 7148
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
Sec. 3. References.
Sec. 4. Explanatory statement.
Sec. 5. Statement of appropriations.
DIVISION A—DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Title I—Military Personnel
Title II—Operation and Maintenance
Title III—Procurement
Title IV—Research, Development, Test and
Evaluation
Title V—Revolving and Management Funds
Title VI—Other Department of Defense Programs
Title VII—Related Agencies
Title VIII—General Provisions
DIVISION B—DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR,
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND
EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Title I—Department of Labor
Title II—Department of Health and Human
Services
Title III—Department of Education
Title IV—Related Agencies
Title V—General Provisions
DIVISION D—TRANSPORTATION, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS
ACT, 2026
Title I—Department of Transportation
Title II—Department of Housing and Urban
Development
Title III—Related Agencies
Title IV—General Provisions—This Act
DIVISION E—AUTHORIZING EXTENDERS
AND TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS
DIVISION F—HEALTH CARE EXTENDERS
SEC. 3. REFERENCES.

Except as expressly provided otherwise,
any reference to ‘‘this Act’’ contained in any
division of this Act shall be treated as referring only to the provisions of that division.
SEC. 4. EXPLANATORY STATEMENT.

The explanatory statement regarding this
Act, printed in the House section of the Con-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1193

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

gressional Record on or about January 21,
2026, and submitted by the chair of the Committee on Appropriations of the House, shall
have the same effect with respect to the allocation of funds and implementation of divisions A through D of this Act as if it were a
joint explanatory statement of a committee
of conference.
The explanatory statement regarding division A of H.R. 7006 of the 119th Congress, the
explanatory statement regarding division B
of H.R. 7006 of the 119th Congress, and the explanatory statement regarding division C of
H.R. 7006 of the 119th Congress, printed in
the House section of the Congressional
Record on January 14, 2026, and submitted by
the chair of the Committee on Appropriations of the House, shall each have the same
effect with respect to the allocation of funds
and implementation of divisions E, F, and G,
respectively, of this Act as if they were each
a joint explanatory statement of a committee of conference.
The explanatory statement regarding H.R.
7147 of the 119th Congress, printed in the
House section of the Congressional Record
on or about January 21, 2026, and submitted
by the chair of the Committee on Appropriations of the House, shall have the same effect
with respect to the allocation of funds and
implementation of division H of this Act as
if it were a joint explanatory statement of a
committee of conference.
SEC. 5. STATEMENT OF APPROPRIATIONS.

The following sums in this Act are appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury
not otherwise appropriated, for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026.
SEC 6. PAYMENT TO WIDOWS AND HEIRS OF DECEASED MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.

For payment to Jill Marie LaMalfa, widow
of Douglas L. LaMalfa, late a Representative
from the State of California, $174.000.
DIVISION A—DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
TITLE I
MILITARY PERSONNEL
MILITARY PERSONNEL, ARMY
For pay, allowances, individual clothing,
subsistence, interest on deposits, gratuities,
permanent change of station travel (including all expenses thereof for organizational
movements), and expenses of temporary duty
travel between permanent duty stations, for
members of the Army on active duty (except
members of reserve components provided for
elsewhere), cadets, and aviation cadets; for
members of the Reserve Officers’ Training
Corps; and for payments pursuant to section
156 of Public Law 97–377, as amended (42
U.S.C. 402 note), and to the Department of
Defense
Military
Retirement
Fund,
$54,538,366,000.
MILITARY PERSONNEL, NAVY
For pay, allowances, individual clothing,
subsistence, interest on deposits, gratuities,
permanent change of station travel (including all expenses thereof for organizational
movements), and expenses of temporary duty
travel between permanent duty stations, for
members of the Navy on active duty (except
members of the Reserve provided for elsewhere), midshipmen, and aviation cadets; for
members of the Reserve Officers’ Training
Corps; and for payments pursuant to section
156 of Public Law 97–377, as amended (42
U.S.C. 402 note), and to the Department of
Defense
Military
Retirement
Fund,
$40,544,559,000.
MILITARY PERSONNEL, MARINE CORPS
For pay, allowances, individual clothing,
subsistence, interest on deposits, gratuities,
permanent change of station travel (including all expenses thereof for organizational
movements), and expenses of temporary duty

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

travel between permanent duty stations, for
members of the Marine Corps on active duty
(except members of the Reserve provided for
elsewhere); and for payments pursuant to
section 156 of Public Law 97–377, as amended
(42 U.S.C. 402 note), and to the Department of
Defense
Military
Retirement
Fund,
$16,990,389,000.
MILITARY PERSONNEL, AIR FORCE
For pay, allowances, individual clothing,
subsistence, interest on deposits, gratuities,
permanent change of station travel (including all expenses thereof for organizational
movements), and expenses of temporary duty
travel between permanent duty stations, for
members of the Air Force on active duty (except members of reserve components provided for elsewhere), cadets, and aviation cadets; for members of the Reserve Officers’
Training Corps; and for payments pursuant
to section 156 of Public Law 97–377, as
amended (42 U.S.C. 402 note), and to the Department of Defense Military Retirement
Fund, $38,768,392,000.
MILITARY PERSONNEL, SPACE FORCE
For pay, allowances, individual clothing,
subsistence, interest on deposits, gratuities,
permanent change of station travel (including all expenses thereof for organizational
movements), and expenses of temporary duty
travel between permanent duty stations, for
members of the Space Force on duty as described in section 20108 of title 10, United
States Code and cadets; for members of the
Reserve Officers’ Training Corps; for expenses authorized by section 16131 of title 10,
United States Code; and for payments pursuant to section 156 of Public Law 97–377, as
amended (42 U.S.C. 402 note), and to the Department of Defense Military Retirement
Fund, $1,494,342,000.
RESERVE PERSONNEL, ARMY
For pay, allowances, clothing, subsistence,
gratuities, travel, and related expenses for
personnel of the Army Reserve on active
duty under sections 10211, 10302, and 7038 of
title 10, United States Code, or while serving
on active duty under section 12301(d) of title
10, United States Code, in connection with
performing duty specified in section 12310(a)
of title 10, United States Code, or while undergoing reserve training, or while performing drills or equivalent duty or other
duty, and expenses authorized by section
16131 of title 10, United States Code; and for
payments to the Department of Defense Military Retirement Fund, $5,733,696,000.
RESERVE PERSONNEL, NAVY
For pay, allowances, clothing, subsistence,
gratuities, travel, and related expenses for
personnel of the Navy Reserve on active duty
under section 10211 of title 10, United States
Code, or while serving on active duty under
section 12301(d) of title 10, United States
Code, in connection with performing duty
specified in section 12310(a) of title 10, United
States Code, or while undergoing reserve
training, or while performing drills or equivalent duty, and expenses authorized by section 16131 of title 10, United States Code; and
for payments to the Department of Defense
Military Retirement Fund, $2,712,359,000.
RESERVE PERSONNEL, MARINE CORPS
For pay, allowances, clothing, subsistence,
gratuities, travel, and related expenses for
personnel of the Marine Corps Reserve on active duty under section 10211 of title 10,
United States Code, or while serving on active duty under section 12301(d) of title 10,
United States Code, in connection with performing duty specified in section 12310(a) of
title 10, United States Code, or while undergoing reserve training, or while performing
drills or equivalent duty, and for members of
the Marine Corps platoon leaders class, and

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.016

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1194

expenses authorized by section 16131 of title
10, United States Code; and for payments to
the Department of Defense Military Retirement Fund, $1,002,925,000.
RESERVE PERSONNEL, AIR FORCE
For pay, allowances, clothing, subsistence,
gratuities, travel, and related expenses for
personnel of the Air Force Reserve on active
duty under sections 10211, 10305, and 9038 of
title 10, United States Code, or while serving
on active duty under section 12301(d) of title
10, United States Code, in connection with
performing duty specified in section 12310(a)
of title 10, United States Code, or while undergoing reserve training, or while performing drills or equivalent duty or other
duty, and expenses authorized by section
16131 of title 10, United States Code; and for
payments to the Department of Defense Military Retirement Fund, $2,701,115,000.
NATIONAL GUARD PERSONNEL, ARMY
For pay, allowances, clothing, subsistence,
gratuities, travel, and related expenses for
personnel of the Army National Guard while
on duty under sections 10211, 10302, or 12402 of
title 10 or section 708 of title 32, United
States Code, or while serving on duty under
section 12301(d) of title 10 or section 502(f) of
title 32, United States Code, in connection
with performing duty specified in section
12310(a) of title 10, United States Code, or
while undergoing training, or while performing drills or equivalent duty or other
duty, and expenses authorized by section
16131 of title 10, United States Code; and for
payments to the Department of Defense Military Retirement Fund, $10,476,992,000.
NATIONAL GUARD PERSONNEL, AIR FORCE
For pay, allowances, clothing, subsistence,
gratuities, travel, and related expenses for
personnel of the Air National Guard on duty
under sections 10211, 10305, or 12402 of title 10
or section 708 of title 32, United States Code,
or while serving on duty under section
12301(d) of title 10 or section 502(f) of title 32,
United States Code, in connection with performing duty specified in section 12310(a) of
title 10, United States Code, or while undergoing training, or while performing drills or
equivalent duty or other duty, and expenses
authorized by section 16131 of title 10, United
States Code; and for payments to the Department of Defense Military Retirement Fund,
$5,467,187,000.
TITLE II
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, ARMY
For expenses, not otherwise provided for,
necessary for the operation and maintenance
of the Army, as authorized by law,
$58,249,178,000: Provided, That not to exceed
$12,478,000 may be used for emergencies and
extraordinary expenses, to be expended upon
the approval or authority of the Secretary of
the Army, and payments may be made upon
the Secretary’s certificate of necessity for
confidential military purposes.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, NAVY
For expenses, not otherwise provided for,
necessary for the operation and maintenance
of the Navy and the Marine Corps, as authorized by law, $74,723,177,000: Provided, That not
to exceed $15,055,000 may be used for emergencies and extraordinary expenses, to be expended upon the approval or authority of the
Secretary of the Navy, and payments may be
made upon the Secretary’s certificate of necessity for confidential military purposes.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, MARINE CORPS
For expenses, not otherwise provided for,
necessary for the operation and maintenance
of the Marine Corps, as authorized by law,
$10,983,917,000.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, AIR FORCE
For expenses, not otherwise provided for,
necessary for the operation and maintenance

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

of the Air Force, as authorized by law,
$61,542,591,000: Provided, That not to exceed
$8,238,000 may be used for emergencies and
extraordinary expenses, to be expended upon
the approval or authority of the Secretary of
the Air Force, and payments may be made
upon the Secretary’s certificate of necessity
for confidential military purposes.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, SPACE FORCE
For expenses, not otherwise provided for,
necessary for the operation and maintenance
of the Space Force, as authorized by law,
$5,687,748,000.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, DEFENSE-WIDE
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For expenses, not otherwise provided for,
necessary for the operation and maintenance
of activities and agencies of the Department
of Defense (other than the military departments), as authorized by law, $56,089,818,000:
Provided, That not more than $2,981,000 may
be used for the Combatant Commander Initiative Fund authorized under section 166a of
title 10, United States Code: Provided further,
That not to exceed $36,000,000 may be used
for emergencies and extraordinary expenses,
to be expended upon the approval or authority of the Secretary of Defense, and payments may be made upon the Secretary’s
certificate of necessity for confidential military purposes: Provided further, That of the
funds provided under this heading, not less
than $60,000,000 shall be made available for
the APEX Accelerators, of which not less
than $5,000,000 shall be available for centers
with eligible entities defined in 10 U.S.C.
4951(1)(D): Provided further, That none of the
funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this Act may be used to plan or implement the consolidation or elimination of
a budget or appropriations liaison office of
the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the office of the Secretary of a military department, or the service headquarters of one of
the Armed Forces into a legislative affairs or
legislative liaison office: Provided further,
That of the funds provided under this heading, not less than $86,500,000 shall be made
available to the Defense Information Systems Agency for Defense Agencies and Field
Activities network optimization and transition costs: Provided further, That of the funds
provided under this heading, $3,121,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, shall
be available only for expenses relating to
certain classified activities: Provided further,
That of the funds provided under this heading, $27,693,000, to remain available until expended, shall be available only for expenses
relating to certain classified activities, and
may be transferred as necessary by the Secretary of Defense to operation and maintenance appropriations or research, development, test and evaluation appropriations, to
be merged with and to be available for the
same time period as the appropriations to
which transferred: Provided further, That any
ceiling on the investment item unit cost of
items that may be purchased with operation
and maintenance funds shall not apply to the
funds described in the preceding proviso: Provided further, That of the funds provided
under this heading, $3,673,457,000, of which
$1,499,808,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, shall be available to provide
support and assistance to foreign security
forces or other groups or individuals to conduct, support or facilitate counterterrorism,
crisis response, or other Department of Defense security cooperation programs: Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense
shall provide quarterly reports to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate on the use
and status of funds made available in this
paragraph: Provided further, That the trans-

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

fer authority provided under this heading is
in addition to any other transfer authority
provided elsewhere in this Act.
COUNTER-ISIS TRAIN AND EQUIP FUND
For the ‘‘Counter-Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria Train and Equip Fund’’, $342,516,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2027:
Provided, That such funds shall be available
to the Secretary of Defense in coordination
with the Secretary of State, to provide assistance, including training; equipment; logistics support, supplies, and services; stipends; infrastructure repair and renovation;
construction for facility fortification and
humane treatment; and sustainment, to foreign security forces, irregular forces, groups,
or individuals participating, or preparing to
participate in activities to counter the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, and their affiliated or associated groups: Provided further, That amounts made available under
this heading shall be available to provide assistance only for activities in a country designated by the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Secretary of State, as
having a security mission to counter the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, and following
written notification to the congressional defense committees of such designation: Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense
shall ensure that prior to providing assistance to elements of any forces or individuals,
such elements or individuals are appropriately vetted, including at a minimum, assessing such elements for associations with
terrorist groups or groups associated with
the Government of Iran; and receiving commitments from such elements to promote respect for human rights and the rule of law:
Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense shall, not fewer than 15 days prior to
obligating from this appropriation account,
notify the congressional defense committees
in writing of the details of any such obligation: Provided further, That the Secretary of
Defense may accept and retain contributions, including assistance in-kind, from foreign governments, including the Government
of Iraq and other entities, to carry out assistance authorized under this heading: Provided further, That contributions of funds for
the purposes provided herein from any foreign government or other entity may be
credited to this Fund, to remain available
until expended, and used for such purposes:
Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense shall prioritize such contributions
when providing any assistance for construction for facility fortification: Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense may
waive a provision of law relating to the acquisition of items and support services or
sections 40 and 40A of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2780 and 2785) if the Secretary determines that such provision of law
would prohibit, restrict, delay or otherwise
limit the provision of such assistance and a
notice of and justification for such waiver is
submitted to the congressional defense committees, the Committees on Appropriations
and Foreign Relations of the Senate and the
Committees on Appropriations and Foreign
Affairs of the House of Representatives: Provided further, That the United States may accept equipment procured using funds provided under this heading, or under the heading, ‘‘Iraq Train and Equip Fund’’ in prior
Acts, that was transferred to security forces,
irregular forces, or groups participating, or
preparing to participate in activities to
counter the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
and returned by such forces or groups to the
United States, and such equipment may be
treated as stocks of the Department of Defense upon written notification to the congressional defense committees: Provided further, That equipment procured using funds

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

provided under this heading, or under the
heading, ‘‘Iraq Train and Equip Fund’’ in
prior Acts, and not yet transferred to security forces, irregular forces, or groups participating, or preparing to participate in activities to counter the Islamic State of Iraq
and Syria may be treated as stocks of the
Department of Defense when determined by
the Secretary to no longer be required for
transfer to such forces or groups and upon
written notification to the congressional defense committees: Provided further, That
none of the funds made available under this
heading may be used to procure or transfer
man-portable air defense systems: Provided
further, That the Secretary of Defense shall
provide quarterly reports to the congressional defense committees on the use of
funds provided under this heading, including,
but not limited to, the number of individuals
trained, the nature and scope of support and
sustainment provided to each group or individual, the area of operations for each group,
and the contributions of other countries,
groups, or individuals.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, ARMY
RESERVE
For expenses, not otherwise provided for,
necessary for the operation and maintenance, including training, organization, and
administration, of the Army Reserve; repair
of facilities and equipment; hire of passenger
motor vehicles; travel and transportation;
care of the dead; recruiting; procurement of
services, supplies, and equipment; and communications, $3,258,861,000.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, NAVY RESERVE
For expenses, not otherwise provided for,
necessary for the operation and maintenance, including training, organization, and
administration, of the Navy Reserve; repair
of facilities and equipment; hire of passenger
motor vehicles; travel and transportation;
care of the dead; recruiting; procurement of
services, supplies, and equipment; and communications, $1,421,774,000.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, MARINE CORPS
RESERVE
For expenses, not otherwise provided for,
necessary for the operation and maintenance, including training, organization, and
administration, of the Marine Corps Reserve;
repair of facilities and equipment; hire of
passenger motor vehicles; travel and transportation; care of the dead; recruiting; procurement of services, supplies, and equipment; and communications, $319,941,000.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, AIR FORCE
RESERVE
For expenses, not otherwise provided for,
necessary for the operation and maintenance, including training, organization, and
administration, of the Air Force Reserve; repair of facilities and equipment; hire of passenger motor vehicles; travel and transportation; care of the dead; recruiting; procurement of services, supplies, and equipment;
and communications, $4,246,342,000.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, ARMY
NATIONAL GUARD
For expenses of training, organizing, and
administering the Army National Guard, including medical and hospital treatment and
related expenses in non-Federal hospitals;
maintenance, operation, and repairs to
structures and facilities; hire of passenger
motor vehicles; personnel services in the National Guard Bureau; travel expenses (other
than mileage), as authorized by law for
Army personnel on active duty, for Army
National Guard division, regimental, and
battalion commanders while inspecting units
in compliance with National Guard Bureau
regulations when specifically authorized by
the Chief, National Guard Bureau; supplying

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1195

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

and equipping the Army National Guard as
authorized by law; and expenses of repair,
modification, maintenance, and issue of supplies and equipment (including aircraft),
$8,578,238,000.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, AIR NATIONAL
GUARD
For expenses of training, organizing, and
administering the Air National Guard, including medical and hospital treatment and
related expenses in non-Federal hospitals;
maintenance, operation, and repairs to
structures and facilities; transportation of
things, hire of passenger motor vehicles; supplying and equipping the Air National
Guard, as authorized by law; expenses for repair, modification, maintenance, and issue of
supplies and equipment, including those furnished from stocks under the control of
agencies of the Department of Defense; travel expenses (other than mileage) on the same
basis as authorized by law for Air National
Guard personnel on active Federal duty, for
Air National Guard commanders while inspecting units in compliance with National
Guard Bureau regulations when specifically
authorized by the Chief, National Guard Bureau, $7,267,399,000.
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE
ARMED FORCES
For salaries and expenses necessary for the
United States Court of Appeals for the
Armed Forces, $21,243,000, of which not to exceed $10,000 may be used for official representation purposes.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, ARMY
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For the Department of the Army,
$190,870,000, to remain available until transferred: Provided, That the Secretary of the
Army shall, upon determining that such
funds are required for environmental restoration, reduction and recycling of hazardous waste, removal of unsafe buildings
and debris of the Department of the Army,
or for similar purposes, transfer the funds
made available by this appropriation to
other appropriations made available to the
Department of the Army, to be merged with
and to be available for the same purposes
and for the same time period as the appropriations to which transferred: Provided further, That upon a determination that all or
part of the funds transferred from this appropriation are not necessary for the purposes
provided herein, such amounts may be transferred back to this appropriation: Provided
further, That the transfer authority provided
under this heading is in addition to any
other transfer authority provided elsewhere
in this Act.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, NAVY
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For the Department of the Navy,
$368,949,000, to remain available until transferred: Provided, That the Secretary of the
Navy shall, upon determining that such
funds are required for environmental restoration, reduction and recycling of hazardous waste, removal of unsafe buildings
and debris of the Department of the Navy, or
for similar purposes, transfer the funds made
available by this appropriation to other appropriations made available to the Department of the Navy, to be merged with and to
be available for the same purposes and for
the same time period as the appropriations
to which transferred: Provided further, That
upon a determination that all or part of the
funds transferred from this appropriation are
not necessary for the purposes provided herein, such amounts may be transferred back to
this appropriation: Provided further, That the
transfer authority provided under this heading is in addition to any other transfer authority provided elsewhere in this Act.

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, AIR FORCE
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For the Department of the Air Force,
$396,149,000, to remain available until transferred: Provided, That the Secretary of the
Air Force shall, upon determining that such
funds are required for environmental restoration, reduction and recycling of hazardous waste, removal of unsafe buildings
and debris of the Department of the Air
Force, or for similar purposes, transfer the
funds made available by this appropriation
to other appropriations made available to
the Department of the Air Force, to be
merged with and to be available for the same
purposes and for the same time period as the
appropriations to which transferred: Provided
further, That upon a determination that all
or part of the funds transferred from this appropriation are not necessary for the purposes provided herein, such amounts may be
transferred back to this appropriation: Provided further, That the transfer authority
provided under this heading is in addition to
any other transfer authority provided elsewhere in this Act.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, DEFENSE-WIDE
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For the Department of Defense, $8,885,000,
to remain available until transferred: Provided, That the Secretary of Defense shall,
upon determining that such funds are required for environmental restoration, reduction and recycling of hazardous waste, removal of unsafe buildings and debris of the
Department of Defense, or for similar purposes, transfer the funds made available by
this appropriation to other appropriations
made available to the Department of Defense, to be merged with and to be available
for the same purposes and for the same time
period as the appropriations to which transferred: Provided further, That upon a determination that all or part of the funds transferred from this appropriation are not necessary for the purposes provided herein, such
amounts may be transferred back to this appropriation: Provided further, That the transfer authority provided under this heading is
in addition to any other transfer authority
provided elsewhere in this Act.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, FORMERLY
USED DEFENSE SITES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For the Department of the Army,
$235,156,000, to remain available until transferred: Provided, That the Secretary of the
Army shall, upon determining that such
funds are required for environmental restoration, reduction and recycling of hazardous waste, removal of unsafe buildings
and debris at sites formerly used by the Department of Defense, transfer the funds made
available by this appropriation to other appropriations made available to the Department of the Army, to be merged with and to
be available for the same purposes and for
the same time period as the appropriations
to which transferred: Provided further, That
upon a determination that all or part of the
funds transferred from this appropriation are
not necessary for the purposes provided herein, such amounts may be transferred back to
this appropriation: Provided further, That the
transfer authority provided under this heading is in addition to any other transfer authority provided elsewhere in this Act.
OVERSEAS HUMANITARIAN, DISASTER, AND
CIVIC AID
For expenses relating to the Overseas Humanitarian, Disaster, and Civic Aid programs of the Department of Defense (consisting of the programs provided under sections 401, 402, 404, 407, 2557, and 2561 of title
10, United States Code), $100,793,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1196

COOPERATIVE THREAT REDUCTION ACCOUNT
For assistance, including assistance provided by contract or by grants, under programs and activities of the Department of
Defense Cooperative Threat Reduction Program authorized under the Department of
Defense Cooperative Threat Reduction Act,
$282,830,000, to remain available until September 30, 2028.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ACQUISITION
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT ACCOUNT
For the Department of Defense Acquisition
Workforce Development Account, $50,846,000:
Provided, That no other amounts may be otherwise credited or transferred to the Account, or deposited into the Account, in fiscal year 2026 pursuant to section 1705(d) of
title 10, United States Code.
TITLE III
PROCUREMENT
AIRCRAFT PROCUREMENT, ARMY
For construction, procurement, production, modification, and modernization of aircraft, equipment, including ordnance, ground
handling equipment, spare parts, and accessories therefor; specialized equipment and
training devices; expansion of public and private plants, including the land necessary
therefor, for the foregoing purposes, and
such lands and interests therein, may be acquired, and construction prosecuted thereon
prior to approval of title; and procurement
and installation of equipment, appliances,
and machine tools in public and private
plants; reserve plant and Government and
contractor-owned equipment layaway; and
other expenses necessary for the foregoing
purposes, $3,625,324,000, to remain available
for obligation until September 30, 2028.
MISSILE PROCUREMENT, ARMY
For construction, procurement, production, modification, and modernization of
missiles, equipment, including ordnance,
ground handling equipment, spare parts, and
accessories therefor; specialized equipment
and training devices; expansion of public and
private plants, including the land necessary
therefor, for the foregoing purposes, and
such lands and interests therein, may be acquired, and construction prosecuted thereon
prior to approval of title; and procurement
and installation of equipment, appliances,
and machine tools in public and private
plants; reserve plant and Government and
contractor-owned equipment layaway; and
other expenses necessary for the foregoing
purposes, $7,287,263,000, to remain available
for obligation until September 30, 2028.
PROCUREMENT OF WEAPONS AND TRACKED
COMBAT VEHICLES, ARMY
For construction, procurement, production, and modification of weapons and
tracked combat vehicles, equipment, including ordnance, spare parts, and accessories
therefor; specialized equipment and training
devices; expansion of public and private
plants, including the land necessary therefor, for the foregoing purposes, and such
lands and interests therein, may be acquired,
and construction prosecuted thereon prior to
approval of title; and procurement and installation of equipment, appliances, and machine tools in public and private plants; reserve plant and Government and contractorowned equipment layaway; and other expenses necessary for the foregoing purposes,
$3,005,021,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2028.
PROCUREMENT OF AMMUNITION, ARMY
For construction, procurement, production, and modification of ammunition, and
accessories therefor; specialized equipment
and training devices; expansion of public and
private plants, including ammunition facili-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

ties, authorized by section 2854 of title 10,
United States Code, and the land necessary
therefor, for the foregoing purposes, and
such lands and interests therein, may be acquired, and construction prosecuted thereon
prior to approval of title; and procurement
and installation of equipment, appliances,
and machine tools in public and private
plants; reserve plant and Government and
contractor-owned equipment layaway; and
other expenses necessary for the foregoing
purposes, $4,576,705,000, to remain available
for obligation until September 30, 2028.
OTHER PROCUREMENT, ARMY
For construction, procurement, production, and modification of vehicles, including
tactical, support, and non-tracked combat
vehicles; the purchase of passenger motor vehicles for replacement only; communications
and electronic equipment; other support
equipment; spare parts, ordnance, and accessories therefor; specialized equipment and
training devices; expansion of public and private plants, including the land necessary
therefor, for the foregoing purposes, and
such lands and interests therein, may be acquired, and construction prosecuted thereon
prior to approval of title; and procurement
and installation of equipment, appliances,
and machine tools in public and private
plants; reserve plant and Government and
contractor-owned equipment layaway; and
other expenses necessary for the foregoing
purposes, $9,412,655,000, to remain available
for obligation until September 30, 2028.
AIRCRAFT PROCUREMENT, NAVY
For construction, procurement, production, modification, and modernization of aircraft, equipment, including ordnance, spare
parts, and accessories therefor; specialized
equipment; expansion of public and private
plants, including the land necessary therefor, and such lands and interests therein,
may be acquired, and construction prosecuted thereon prior to approval of title; and
procurement and installation of equipment,
appliances, and machine tools in public and
private plants; reserve plant and Government and contractor-owned equipment layaway, $17,239,853,000, to remain available for
obligation until September 30, 2028.
WEAPONS PROCUREMENT, NAVY
For construction, procurement, production, modification, and modernization of
missiles, torpedoes, other weapons, and related support equipment including spare
parts, and accessories therefor; expansion of
public and private plants, including the land
necessary therefor, and such lands and interests therein, may be acquired, and construction prosecuted thereon prior to approval of
title; and procurement and installation of
equipment, appliances, and machine tools in
public and private plants; reserve plant and
Government and contractor-owned equipment layaway, $6,086,954,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2028.
PROCUREMENT OF AMMUNITION, NAVY AND
MARINE CORPS
For construction, procurement, production, and modification of ammunition, and
accessories therefor; specialized equipment
and training devices; expansion of public and
private plants, including ammunition facilities, authorized by section 2854 of title 10,
United States Code, and the land necessary
therefor, for the foregoing purposes, and
such lands and interests therein, may be acquired, and construction prosecuted thereon
prior to approval of title; and procurement
and installation of equipment, appliances,
and machine tools in public and private
plants; reserve plant and Government and
contractor-owned equipment layaway; and
other expenses necessary for the foregoing
purposes, $1,098,630,000, to remain available
for obligation until September 30, 2028.

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SHIPBUILDING AND CONVERSION, NAVY
For expenses necessary for the construction, acquisition, or conversion of vessels as
authorized by law, including armor and armament thereof, plant equipment, appliances, and machine tools and installation
thereof in public and private plants; reserve
plant and Government and contractor-owned
equipment layaway; procurement of critical,
long lead time components and designs for
vessels to be constructed or converted in the
future; and expansion of public and private
plants, including land necessary therefor,
and such lands and interests therein, may be
acquired, and construction prosecuted thereon prior to approval of title, as follows:
Columbia Class Submarine, $3,928,828,000;
Columbia
Class
Submarine
(AP),
$5,350,766,000;
Carrier Replacement Program (CVN–80),
$1,046,700,000;
Carrier
Replacement
Program
(AP),
$612,038,000;
Carrier Replacement Program (CVN–81),
$1,622,935,000;
Virginia Class Submarine, $2,740,305,000;
Virginia
Class
Submarine
(AP),
$3,126,816,000;
CVN Refueling Overhauls, $1,579,011,000;
DDG–1000 Program, $52,358,000;
DDG–51 Destroyer, $10,773,000;
DDG–51 Destroyer (AP), $1,750,000,000;
FFG–Frigate, $100,000,000;
FF(X)–Frigate, $242,000,000;
Medium Landing Ship, $800,000,000;
TAO Fleet Oiler, $8,346,000;
TAGOS Surtass Ships, $612,205,000;
Towing, Salvage, and Rescue Ship,
$141,500,000;
Ship to Shore Connector, $320,000,000;
Service Craft, $174,602,000;
Auxiliary Personnel Lighter, $79,000,000;
Auxiliary Vessels, $290,000,000;
For outfitting, post delivery, conversions,
and
first
destination
transportation,
$886,846,000; and
Completion of Prior Year Shipbuilding
Programs, $1,676,587,000.
In all: $27,151,616,000, to remain available
for obligation until September 30, 2030: Provided, That additional obligations may be incurred after September 30, 2030, for engineering services, tests, evaluations, and other
such budgeted work that must be performed
in the final stage of ship construction: Provided further, That none of the funds provided
under this heading for the construction or
conversion of any naval vessel to be constructed in shipyards in the United States
shall be expended in foreign facilities for the
construction of major components of such
vessel: Provided further, That none of the
funds provided under this heading shall be
used for the construction of any naval vessel
in foreign shipyards: Provided further, That
funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this Act for Columbia Class Submarine (AP) may be available for the purposes authorized by subsections (f), (g), (h) or
(i) of section 2218a of title 10, United States
Code, only in accordance with the provisions
of the applicable subsection.
OTHER PROCUREMENT, NAVY
For procurement, production, and modernization of support equipment and materials not otherwise provided for, Navy ordnance (except ordnance for new aircraft, new
ships, and ships authorized for conversion);
the purchase of passenger motor vehicles for
replacement only; expansion of public and
private plants, including the land necessary
therefor, and such lands and interests therein, may be acquired, and construction prosecuted thereon prior to approval of title; and
procurement and installation of equipment,
appliances, and machine tools in public and

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

private plants; reserve plant and Government and contractor-owned equipment layaway, $14,693,978,000, to remain available for
obligation until September 30, 2028: Provided,
That such funds are also available for the
maintenance, repair, and modernization of
ships under a pilot program established for
such purposes.
PROCUREMENT, MARINE CORPS
For expenses necessary for the procurement, manufacture, and modification of missiles, armament, military equipment, spare
parts, and accessories therefor; plant equipment, appliances, and machine tools, and installation thereof in public and private
plants; reserve plant and Government and
contractor-owned equipment layaway; vehicles for the Marine Corps, including the purchase of passenger motor vehicles for replacement only; and expansion of public and
private plants, including land necessary
therefor, and such lands and interests therein, may be acquired, and construction prosecuted thereon prior to approval of title,
$3,682,643,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2028.
AIRCRAFT PROCUREMENT, AIR FORCE
For construction, procurement, and modification of aircraft and equipment, including
armor and armament, specialized ground
handling equipment, and training devices,
spare parts, and accessories therefor; specialized equipment; expansion of public and private plants, Government-owned equipment
and installation thereof in such plants, erection of structures, and acquisition of land,
for the foregoing purposes, and such lands
and interests therein, may be acquired, and
construction prosecuted thereon prior to approval of title; reserve plant and Government and contractor-owned equipment layaway; and other expenses necessary for the
foregoing purposes including rents and transportation of things, $19,964,954,000, to remain
available for obligation until September 30,
2028.
MISSILE PROCUREMENT, AIR FORCE
For construction, procurement, and modification of missiles, rockets, and related
equipment, including spare parts and accessories therefor; ground handling equipment,
and training devices; expansion of public and
private plants, Government-owned equipment and installation thereof in such plants,
erection of structures, and acquisition of
land, for the foregoing purposes, and such
lands and interests therein, may be acquired,
and construction prosecuted thereon prior to
approval of title; reserve plant and Government and contractor-owned equipment layaway; and other expenses necessary for the
foregoing purposes including rents and transportation of things, $3,963,961,000, to remain
available for obligation until September 30,
2028.
PROCUREMENT OF AMMUNITION, AIR FORCE
For construction, procurement, production, and modification of ammunition, and
accessories therefor; specialized equipment
and training devices; expansion of public and
private plants, including ammunition facilities, authorized by section 2854 of title 10,
United States Code, and the land necessary
therefor, for the foregoing purposes, and
such lands and interests therein, may be acquired, and construction prosecuted thereon
prior to approval of title; and procurement
and installation of equipment, appliances,
and machine tools in public and private
plants; reserve plant and Government and
contractor-owned equipment layaway; and
other expenses necessary for the foregoing
purposes, $773,327,000, to remain available for
obligation until September 30, 2028.
OTHER PROCUREMENT, AIR FORCE
For procurement and modification of
equipment (including ground guidance and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1197

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

electronic control equipment, and ground
electronic and communication equipment),
and supplies, materials, and spare parts
therefor, not otherwise provided for; the purchase of passenger motor vehicles for replacement only; lease of passenger motor vehicles; and expansion of public and private
plants, Government-owned equipment and
installation thereof in such plants, erection
of structures, and acquisition of land, for the
foregoing purposes, and such lands and interests therein, may be acquired, and construction prosecuted thereon, prior to approval of
title; reserve plant and Government and contractor-owned
equipment
layaway,
$32,605,147,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2028.
PROCUREMENT, SPACE FORCE
For construction, procurement, and modification of spacecraft, rockets, and related
equipment, including spare parts and accessories therefor; ground handling equipment,
and training devices; expansion of public and
private plants, Government-owned equipment and installation thereof in such plants,
erection of structures, and acquisition of
land, for the foregoing purposes, and such
lands and interests therein, may be acquired,
and construction prosecuted thereon prior to
approval of title; reserve plant and Government and contractor-owned equipment layaway; and other expenses necessary for the
foregoing purposes including rents and transportation of things, $4,036,035,000, to remain
available for obligation until September 30,
2028.

TITLE IV
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND
EVALUATION
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND
EVALUATION, ARMY
For expenses necessary for basic and applied scientific research, development, test
and evaluation, including maintenance, rehabilitation, lease, and operation of facilities and equipment, $16,705,760,000, to remain
available for obligation until September 30,
2027.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND
EVALUATION, NAVY
For expenses necessary for basic and applied scientific research, development, test
and evaluation, including maintenance, rehabilitation, lease, and operation of facilities and equipment, $28,099,776,000, to remain
available for obligation until September 30,
2027: Provided, That funds appropriated in
this paragraph which are available for the V–
22 may be used to meet unique operational
requirements of the Special Operations
Forces.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND
EVALUATION, AIR FORCE
For expenses necessary for basic and applied scientific research, development, test
and evaluation, including maintenance, rehabilitation, lease, and operation of facilities and equipment, $50,614,595,000, to remain
available for obligation until September 30,
2027.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND
EVALUATION, SPACE FORCE

PROCUREMENT, DEFENSE-WIDE
For expenses of activities and agencies of
the Department of Defense (other than the
military departments) necessary for procurement, production, and modification of equipment, supplies, materials, and spare parts
therefor, not otherwise provided for; the purchase of passenger motor vehicles for replacement only; expansion of public and private plants, equipment, and installation
thereof in such plants, erection of structures, and acquisition of land for the foregoing purposes, and such lands and interests
therein, may be acquired, and construction
prosecuted thereon prior to approval of title;
reserve plant and Government and contractor-owned
equipment
layaway,
$7,142,723,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2028.
DEFENSE PRODUCTION ACT PURCHASES
For activities by the Department of Defense pursuant to sections 108, 301, 302, and
303 of the Defense Production Act of 1950 (50
U.S.C. 4518, 4531, 4532, and 4533), $321,923,000,
to remain available for obligation until expended, which shall be obligated and expended by the Secretary of Defense as if delegated the necessary authorities conferred
by the Defense Production Act of 1950.
NATIONAL GUARD AND RESERVE EQUIPMENT
ACCOUNT
For procurement of rotary-wing aircraft;
combat, tactical and support vehicles; other
weapons; and other procurement items for
the reserve components of the Armed Forces,
$800,000,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2028: Provided, That
the Chiefs of National Guard and Reserve
components shall, not later than 30 days
after enactment of this Act, individually
submit to the congressional defense committees the modernization priority assessment
for their respective National Guard or Reserve component: Provided further, That none
of the funds made available by this paragraph may be used to procure manned fixed
wing aircraft, or procure or modify missiles,
munitions, or ammunition.

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

For expenses necessary for basic and applied scientific research, development, test
and evaluation, including maintenance, rehabilitation, lease, and operation of facilities and equipment, $14,917,160,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND
EVALUATION, DEFENSE-WIDE
For expenses of activities and agencies of
the Department of Defense (other than the
military departments), necessary for basic
and applied scientific research, development,
test and evaluation; advanced research
projects as may be designated and determined by the Secretary of Defense, pursuant
to law; maintenance, rehabilitation, lease,
and operation of facilities and equipment,
$35,248,875,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2027.
OPERATIONAL TEST AND EVALUATION,
DEFENSE
For expenses, not otherwise provided for,
necessary for the independent activities of
the Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, in the direction and supervision of
operational test and evaluation, including
initial operational test and evaluation which
is conducted prior to, and in support of, production decisions; joint operational testing
and evaluation; and administrative expenses
in connection therewith, $336,143,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2027.
TITLE V
REVOLVING AND MANAGEMENT FUNDS
DEFENSE WORKING CAPITAL FUNDS
For the Defense Working Capital Funds,
$2,126,540,000.
NATIONAL DEFENSE STOCKPILE TRANSACTION
FUND
For the National Defense Stockpile Transaction Fund, $5,700,000, for activities pursuant to the Strategic and Critical Materials
Stock Piling Act (50 U.S.C. 98 et seq.).

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1198

TITLE VI
OTHER DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
PROGRAMS
DEFENSE HEALTH PROGRAM
For expenses, not otherwise provided for,
for medical and health care programs of the
Department of Defense as authorized by law,
$41,770,246,000; of which $38,942,713,000 shall be
for operation and maintenance, of which not
to exceed one percent shall remain available
for obligation until September 30, 2027, and
of which up to $21,023,765,000 may be available for contracts entered into under the
TRICARE program; of which $354,821,000, to
remain available for obligation until September 30, 2028, shall be for procurement; and
of which $2,472,712,000, to remain available
for obligation until September 30, 2027, shall
be for research, development, test and evaluation: Provided, That of the funds provided
under this heading for research, development, test and evaluation, not less than
$1,270,000,000 shall be made available to the
Defense Health Agency to carry out the congressionally directed medical research programs: Provided further, That, notwithstanding any other provision of law, of the
amount made available under this heading
for research, development, test and evaluation, not less than $15,000,000 shall be available for HIV prevention educational activities undertaken in connection with United
States military training, exercises, and humanitarian assistance activities conducted
primarily in African nations: Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees
quarterly reports on the current status of
the electronic health record program: Provided further, That the Comptroller General
of the United States shall perform quarterly
performance reviews of the electronic health
record program.
CHEMICAL AGENTS AND MUNITIONS
DESTRUCTION, DEFENSE
For expenses, not otherwise provided for,
necessary for the destruction of the United
States stockpile of lethal chemical agents
and munitions in accordance with the provisions of section 1412 of the Department of
Defense Authorization Act, 1986 (50 U.S.C.
1521), $213,282,000, of which $3,243,000 shall be
for operation and maintenance, of which not
less than $3,243,000 shall be for the Chemical
Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program,
consisting of $2,340,000 for activities on military installations and $903,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027, to assist
State
and
local
governments;
and
$210,039,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, shall be for research, development, test and evaluation, of which
$210,039,000 shall only be for the Assembled
Chemical Weapons Alternatives program.
DRUG INTERDICTION AND COUNTER-DRUG
ACTIVITIES, DEFENSE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For drug interdiction and counter-drug activities of the Department of Defense, for
transfer to appropriations available to the
Department of Defense for military personnel of the reserve components serving
under the provisions of title 10 and title 32,
United States Code; for operation and maintenance; for procurement; and for research,
development,
test
and
evaluation,
$1,148,675,000, of which $678,737,000 shall be for
counter-narcotics support; $134,938,000 shall
be for the drug demand reduction program;
$305,000,000 shall be for the National Guard
counter-drug program; and $30,000,000 shall
be for the National Guard counter-drug
schools program: Provided, That the funds
appropriated under this heading shall be
available for obligation for the same time
period and for the same purpose as the ap-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

propriation to which transferred: Provided
further, That upon a determination that all
or part of the funds transferred from this appropriation are not necessary for the purposes provided herein, such amounts may be
transferred back to this appropriation: Provided further, That the transfer authority
provided under this heading is in addition to
any other transfer authority contained elsewhere in this Act.
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL
For expenses and activities of the Office of
the Inspector General in carrying out the
provisions of the Inspector General Act of
1978, as amended, $517,599,000, of which
$511,895,000 shall be for operation and maintenance, of which not to exceed $700,000 is
available for emergencies and extraordinary
expenses to be expended upon the approval or
authority of the Inspector General, and payments may be made upon the Inspector General’s certificate of necessity for confidential
military purposes; of which $1,079,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2028, shall be for procurement; and
of which $4,625,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2027, shall be for research, development, test and evaluation.
TITLE VII
RELATED AGENCIES
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY RETIREMENT
AND DISABILITY SYSTEM FUND
For payment to the Central Intelligence
Agency Retirement and Disability System
Fund, to maintain the proper funding level
for continuing the operation of the Central
Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System, $514,000,000.
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY MANAGEMENT
ACCOUNT
For necessary expenses of the Intelligence
Community
Management
Account,
$629,128,000.
TITLE VIII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 8001. No part of any appropriation
contained in this Act shall be used for publicity or propaganda purposes not authorized
by the Congress.
SEC. 8002. During the current fiscal year,
provisions of law prohibiting the payment of
compensation to, or employment of, any person not a citizen of the United States shall
not apply to personnel of the Department of
Defense: Provided, That salary increases
granted to direct and indirect hire foreign
national employees of the Department of Defense funded by this Act shall not be at a
rate in excess of the percentage increase authorized by law for civilian employees of the
Department of Defense whose pay is computed under the provisions of section 5332 of
title 5, United States Code, or at a rate in excess of the percentage increase provided by
the appropriate host nation to its own employees, whichever is higher: Provided further, That this section shall not apply to Department of Defense foreign service national
employees serving at United States diplomatic missions whose pay is set by the Department of State under the Foreign Service
Act of 1980: Provided further, That the limitations of this provision shall not apply to foreign national employees of the Department
of Defense in the Republic of Turkey.
SEC. 8003. No part of any appropriation
contained in this Act shall remain available
for obligation beyond the current fiscal year,
unless expressly so provided herein.
SEC. 8004. No more than 20 percent of the
appropriations in this Act which are limited
for obligation during the current fiscal year
shall be obligated during the last 2 months of
the fiscal year: Provided, That this section
shall not apply to obligations for support of

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

active duty training of reserve components
or summer camp training of the Reserve Officers’ Training Corps.
(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8005. Upon determination by the Secretary of Defense that such action is necessary in the national interest, the Secretary may, with the approval of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget,
transfer not to exceed $6,000,000,000 of working capital funds of the Department of Defense or funds made available in this Act to
the Department of Defense for military functions (except military construction) between
such appropriations or funds or any subdivision thereof, to be merged with and to be
available for the same purposes, and for the
same time period, as the appropriation or
fund to which transferred: Provided, That
such authority to transfer may not be used
unless for higher priority items, based on unforeseen military requirements, than those
for which originally appropriated and in no
case where the item for which funds are requested has been denied by the Congress:
Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense shall notify the Congress promptly of
all transfers made pursuant to this authority
or any other authority in this Act: Provided
further, That no part of the funds in this Act
shall be available to prepare or present a request to the Committees on Appropriations
of the House of Representatives and the Senate for reprogramming of funds, unless for
higher priority items, based on unforeseen
military requirements, than those for which
originally appropriated and in no case where
the item for which reprogramming is requested has been denied by the Congress:
Provided further, That a request for multiple
reprogrammings of funds using authority
provided in this section shall be made prior
to June 30, 2026: Provided further, That transfers among military personnel appropriations shall not be taken into account for purposes of the limitation on the amount of
funds that may be transferred under this section.
SEC. 8006. (a) With regard to the list of specific programs, projects, and activities (and
the dollar amounts and adjustments to budget activities corresponding to such programs,
projects, and activities) contained in the tables titled Explanation of Project Level Adjustments in the explanatory statement regarding this Act and the tables contained in
the classified annex accompanying this Act,
the obligation and expenditure of amounts
appropriated or otherwise made available by
this Act for those programs, projects, and activities are hereby required by law to be carried out in the manner provided by such tables to the same extent as if the tables were
included in the text of this Act.
(b) Amounts specified in the referenced tables described in subsection (a) shall not be
treated as subdivisions of appropriations for
purposes of section 8005 of this Act: Provided,
That section 8005 of this Act shall apply
when transfers of the amounts described in
subsection (a) occur between appropriation
accounts, subject to the limitation in subsection (c): Provided further, That the transfer amount limitation provided in section
8005 of this Act shall not apply to transfers
of amounts described in subsection (a) if
such transfers are necessary for the proper
execution of such funds.
(c) During the current fiscal year, amounts
specified in the referenced tables in titles III
and IV of this Act described in subsection (a)
may not be transferred pursuant to section
8005 of this Act other than for proper execution of such amounts, as provided in subsection (b).
SEC. 8007. (a) Not later than 60 days after
the date of the enactment of this Act, the

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

Department of Defense shall submit a report
to the congressional defense committees to
establish the baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for
fiscal year 2026: Provided, That the report
shall include—
(1) a table for each appropriation with a
separate column to display the President’s
budget request, adjustments made by Congress, adjustments due to enacted rescissions, if appropriate, and the fiscal year enacted level;
(2) a delineation in the table for each appropriation both by budget activity and program, project, and activity as detailed in the
Budget Appendix; and
(3) an identification of items of special
congressional interest.
(b) Notwithstanding section 8005 of this
Act, none of the funds provided in this Act
shall be available for reprogramming or
transfer until the report identified in subsection (a) is submitted to the congressional
defense committees, unless the Secretary of
Defense certifies in writing to the congressional defense committees that such reprogramming or transfer is necessary as an
emergency requirement: Provided, That this
subsection shall not apply to transfers from
the following appropriations accounts:
(1) ‘‘Environmental Restoration, Army’’;
(2) ‘‘Environmental Restoration, Navy’’;
(3)
‘‘Environmental
Restoration,
Air
Force’’;
(4) ‘‘Environmental Restoration, DefenseWide’’;
(5) ‘‘Environmental Restoration, Formerly
Used Defense Sites’’; and
(6) ‘‘Drug Interdiction and Counter-drug
Activities, Defense’’.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8008. During the current fiscal year,
cash balances in working capital funds of the
Department of Defense established pursuant
to section 2208 of title 10, United States
Code, may be maintained in only such
amounts as are necessary at any time for
cash disbursements to be made from such
funds: Provided, That transfers may be made
between such funds: Provided further, That
transfers may be made between working capital funds and the ‘‘Foreign Currency Fluctuations, Defense’’ appropriation and the
‘‘Operation and Maintenance’’ appropriation
accounts in such amounts as may be determined by the Secretary of Defense, with the
approval of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, except that such transfers may not be made unless the Secretary of
Defense has notified the Congress of the proposed transfer: Provided further, That except
in amounts equal to the amounts appropriated to working capital funds in this Act,
no obligations may be made against a working capital fund to procure or increase the
value of war reserve material inventory, unless the Secretary of Defense has notified the
Congress prior to any such obligation.
SEC. 8009. Funds appropriated by this Act
may not be used to initiate, or materially
modify the scope of, a special access program
without prior notification 30 calendar days
in advance to the congressional defense committees.
SEC. 8010. (a) None of the funds made available to the Department of Defense for this
fiscal year or any prior fiscal year shall be
available to initiate: (1) a multiyear contract that employs economic order quantity
procurement in excess of $20,000,000 in any
one year of the contract or that includes an
unfunded contingent liability in excess of
$20,000,000; or (2) a contract for advance procurement leading to a multiyear contract
that employs economic order quantity procurement in excess of $20,000,000 in any one
year, unless the congressional defense com-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1199

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

mittees have been notified at least 30 days in
advance of the proposed contract award: Provided, That no part of any appropriation
made available to the Department of Defense
for this fiscal year or any prior fiscal year
shall be available to initiate a multiyear
contract for which the economic order quantity advance procurement is not funded at
least to the limits of the Government’s liability: Provided further, That no part of any
appropriation made available to the Department of Defense for this fiscal year or any
prior fiscal year shall be available to initiate
multiyear procurement contracts for any
systems or component thereof if the value of
the multiyear contract would exceed
$500,000,000 unless specifically provided in
this Act: Provided further, That no multiyear
procurement contract can be terminated
without 30-day prior notification to the congressional defense committees: Provided further, That the execution of multiyear authority shall require the use of a present
value analysis to determine lowest cost compared to an annual procurement.
(b) None of the funds made available to the
Department of Defense for this fiscal year or
any prior fiscal year may be used for a
multiyear contract executed after the date
of the enactment of this Act unless in the
case of any such contract—
(1) the Secretary of Defense has submitted
to Congress a budget request for full funding
of units to be procured through the contract
and, in the case of a contract for procurement of aircraft, that includes, for any aircraft unit to be procured through the contract for which procurement funds are requested in that budget request for production beyond advance procurement activities
in the fiscal year covered by the budget, full
funding of procurement of such unit in that
fiscal year;
(2) cancellation provisions in the contract
do not include consideration of recurring
manufacturing costs of the contractor associated with the production of unfunded units
to be delivered under the contract;
(3) the contract provides that payments to
the contractor under the contract shall not
be made in advance of incurred costs on
funded units; and
(4) the contract does not provide for a price
adjustment based on a failure.
(c) Concurrent with the annual budget submission of the President for fiscal year 2027
pursuant to section 1105(a) of title 31, United
States Code, that is in compliance with subsection (b)(1), and notwithstanding subsection (b)(4)(B) of section 804 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
Year 2026 (Public Law 119–60), funds appropriated to the Department of Defense in title
III of this Act or in any other provision of
law may be used for multiyear procurement
contracts, for a period of not more than five
years, as follows: Standard Missile–6; Long
Range Anti-Ship Missile; Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile Extended Range; Advanced Medium-Range Air-to-Air Missile;
and Standard Missile–3 Block 1B; and for a
period of not more than seven years, as follows: PATRIOT Advanced Capability–3 Missile Segment Enhancement; Terminal High
Altitude Area Defense; and Tomahawk
Cruise Missile Systems: Provided, That until
such submission is provided to the congressional defense committees, to include P–1
and R–1 budget justification documents,
which shall identify the allocation of funds
by program, project, and activity, none of
the funds made available to the Department
of Defense for this fiscal year or any prior
fiscal year may be obligated or expended to
enter into any multiyear procurement contracts: Provided further, That before entering
into a multiyear procurement contract for
Tomahawk Cruise Missile Systems, Joint

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile Extended
Range, or Standard Missile–6, the Secretary
of Defense shall certify in writing to the congressional defense committees that such action is in the national security interests of
the United States.
SEC. 8011. Within the funds appropriated
for the operation and maintenance of the
Armed Forces, funds are hereby appropriated
pursuant to section 401 of title 10, United
States Code, for humanitarian and civic assistance costs under chapter 20 of title 10,
United States Code: Provided, That such
funds may also be obligated for humanitarian and civic assistance costs incidental
to authorized operations and pursuant to authority granted in section 401 of title 10,
United States Code, and these obligations
shall be reported as required by section
401(d) of title 10, United States Code: Provided further, That funds available for operation and maintenance shall be available for
providing humanitarian and similar assistance by using Civic Action Teams in the
Trust Territories of the Pacific Islands and
freely associated states of Micronesia, pursuant to the Compact of Free Association as
authorized by Public Law 99–239: Provided
further, That upon a determination by the
Secretary of Defense that such action is beneficial for graduate medical education programs conducted at Defense Health Agency
medical facilities located in Hawaii, the Secretary of Defense may authorize the provision of medical services at such facilities and
transportation to such facilities, on a nonreimbursable basis, for civilian patients from
American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands, the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia,
Palau, and Guam.
SEC. 8012. None of the funds appropriated
by this or any other Act, including prior
year Acts, may be used to obligate and expend funds in the Defense Modernization Account made available in accordance with
subsection (c) of section 3136 of title 10,
United States Code, except for the purposes
described in paragraphs (d)(1) through (d)(4):
Provided, That any program increases, as detailed in the tables titled Explanation of
Project Level Adjustments in the explanatory statement regarding this Act, may not
be transferred to the Defense Modernization
Account pursuant to subsection (c) of section
3136 of title 10, United States Code.
SEC. 8013. None of the funds made available
by this Act shall be used in any way, directly
or indirectly, to influence congressional action on any legislation or appropriation matters pending before the Congress.
SEC. 8014. None of the funds available in
this Act to the Department of Defense, other
than appropriations made for necessary or
routine refurbishments, upgrades, or maintenance activities, shall be used to reduce or to
prepare to reduce the number of deployed
and non-deployed strategic delivery vehicles
and launchers below the levels set forth in
the report submitted to Congress in accordance with section 1042 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012.
(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8015. (a) Funds appropriated in title
III of this Act for the Department of Defense
Pilot Mentor-Protégé Program may be transferred to any other appropriation contained
in this Act solely for the purpose of implementing a Mentor-Protégé Program developmental assistance agreement pursuant to
section 4902 of title 10, United States Code,
under the authority of this provision or any
other transfer authority contained in this
Act.
(b) The Secretary of Defense shall include
with the budget justification documents in
support of the budget for fiscal year 2027 (as

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1200

submitted to Congress pursuant to section
1105 of title 31, United States Code) a description of each transfer under this section that
occurred during the last fiscal year before
the fiscal year in which such budget is submitted.
SEC. 8016. None of the funds in this Act
may be available for the purchase by the Department of Defense (and its departments
and agencies) of welded shipboard anchor and
mooring chain unless the anchor and mooring chain are manufactured in the United
States from components which are substantially manufactured in the United States:
Provided, That for the purpose of this section, the term ‘‘manufactured’’ shall include
cutting, heat treating, quality control, testing of chain and welding (including the forging and shot blasting process): Provided further, That for the purpose of this section substantially all of the components of anchor
and mooring chain shall be considered to be
produced or manufactured in the United
States if the aggregate cost of the components produced or manufactured in the
United States exceeds the aggregate cost of
the components produced or manufactured
outside the United States: Provided further,
That when adequate domestic supplies are
not available to meet Department of Defense
requirements on a timely basis, the Secretary of the Service responsible for the procurement may waive this restriction on a
case-by-case basis by certifying in writing to
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate
that such an acquisition must be made in
order to acquire capability for national security purposes.
SEC. 8017. None of the funds appropriated
by this Act shall be used for the support of
any nonappropriated funds activity of the
Department of Defense that procures malt
beverages and wine with nonappropriated
funds for resale (including such alcoholic
beverages sold by the drink) on a military
installation located in the United States unless such malt beverages and wine are procured within that State, or in the case of the
District of Columbia, within the District of
Columbia, in which the military installation
is located: Provided, That, in a case in which
the military installation is located in more
than one State, purchases may be made in
any State in which the installation is located: Provided further, That such local procurement requirements for malt beverages
and wine shall apply to all alcoholic beverages only for military installations in
States which are not contiguous with another State: Provided further, That alcoholic
beverages other than wine and malt beverages, in contiguous States and the District
of Columbia shall be procured from the most
competitive source, price and other factors
considered.
SEC. 8018. None of the funds available to
the Department of Defense may be used to
demilitarize or dispose of M–1 Carbines, M–1
Garand rifles, M–14 rifles, .22 caliber rifles,
.30 caliber rifles, or M–1911 pistols, or to demilitarize or destroy small arms ammunition or ammunition components that are not
otherwise prohibited from commercial sale
under Federal law, unless the small arms
ammunition or ammunition components are
certified by the Secretary of the Army or
designee as unserviceable or unsafe for further use.
SEC. 8019. No more than $500,000 of the
funds appropriated or made available in this
Act shall be used during a single fiscal year
for any single relocation of an organization,
unit, activity or function of the Department
of Defense into or within the National Capital Region: Provided, That the Secretary of
Defense may waive this restriction on a caseby-case basis by certifying in writing to the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

congressional defense committees that such
a relocation is required in the best interest
of the Government.
SEC. 8020. Of the funds made available in
this Act under the heading ‘‘Procurement,
Defense-Wide’’, $24,613,000 shall be available
only for incentive payments authorized by
section 504 of the Indian Financing Act of
1974 (25 U.S.C. 1544): Provided, That a prime
contractor or a subcontractor at any tier
that makes a subcontract award to any subcontractor or supplier as defined in section
1544 of title 25, United States Code, or a
small business owned and controlled by an
individual or individuals defined under section 4221(9) of title 25, United States Code,
shall be considered a contractor for the purposes of being allowed additional compensation under section 504 of the Indian Financing Act of 1974 (25 U.S.C. 1544) whenever the
prime contract or subcontract amount is
over $500,000 and involves the expenditure of
funds appropriated by an Act making appropriations for the Department of Defense with
respect to any fiscal year: Provided further,
That notwithstanding section 1906 of title 41,
United States Code, this section shall be applicable to any Department of Defense acquisition of supplies or services, including any
contract and any subcontract at any tier for
acquisition of commercial items produced or
manufactured, in whole or in part, by any
subcontractor or supplier defined in section
1544 of title 25, United States Code, or a
small business owned and controlled by an
individual or individuals defined under section 4221(9) of title 25, United States Code.
SEC. 8021. (a) Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, the Secretary of the Air
Force may convey at no cost to the Air
Force, without consideration, to Indian
tribes located in the States of Nevada, Idaho,
North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Oregon,
Minnesota,
and
Washington
relocatable military housing units located at
Grand Forks Air Force Base, Malmstrom Air
Force Base, Mountain Home Air Force Base,
Ellsworth Air Force Base, and Minot Air
Force Base that are excess to the needs of
the Air Force.
(b) The Secretary of the Air Force shall
convey, at no cost to the Air Force, military
housing units under subsection (a) in accordance with the request for such units that are
submitted to the Secretary by the Operation
Walking Shield Program on behalf of Indian
tribes located in the States of Nevada, Idaho,
North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Oregon, Minnesota, and Washington. Any such
conveyance shall be subject to the condition
that the housing units shall be removed
within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the Secretary.
(c) The Operation Walking Shield Program
shall resolve any conflicts among requests of
Indian tribes for housing units under subsection (a) before submitting requests to the
Secretary of the Air Force under subsection
(b).
(d) In this section, the term ‘‘Indian tribe’’
means any recognized Indian tribe included
on the current list published by the Secretary of the Interior under section 104 of the
Federally Recognized Indian Tribe Act of
1994 (Public Law 103–454; 108 Stat. 4792; 25
U.S.C. 5131).
SEC. 8022. Of the funds appropriated to the
Department of Defense under the heading
‘‘Operation
and
Maintenance,
DefenseWide’’, not less than $12,000,000 may be made
available only for the mitigation of environmental impacts, including training and technical assistance to tribes, related administrative support, the gathering of information, documenting of environmental damage,
and developing a system for prioritization of
mitigation and cost to complete estimates
for mitigation, on Indian lands resulting
from Department of Defense activities.

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SEC. 8023. Funds appropriated by this Act
for the Defense Media Activity shall not be
used for any national or international political or psychological activities.
SEC. 8024. Of the amounts appropriated for
‘‘Working Capital Fund, Army’’, $100,000,000
shall be available to maintain competitive
rates at the arsenals.
SEC. 8025. (a) Of the funds made available
in this Act, not less than $79,000,000 shall be
available for the Civil Air Patrol Corporation, of which—
(1) $57,900,000 shall be available from ‘‘Operation and Maintenance, Air Force’’ to support Civil Air Patrol Corporation operation
and maintenance, readiness, counter-drug
activities, and drug demand reduction activities involving youth programs;
(2) $17,800,000 shall be available from ‘‘Aircraft Procurement, Air Force’’; and
(3) $3,300,000 shall be available from ‘‘Other
Procurement, Air Force’’ for vehicle procurement.
(b) The Secretary of the Air Force should
waive reimbursement for any funds used by
the Civil Air Patrol for counter-drug activities in support of Federal, State, and local
government agencies.
SEC. 8026. (a) None of the funds appropriated in this Act are available to establish
a new Department of Defense (department)
federally funded research and development
center (FFRDC), either as a new entity, or as
a separate entity administrated by an organization managing another FFRDC, or as a
nonprofit membership corporation consisting of a consortium of other FFRDCs and
other nonprofit entities.
(b) Except when acting in a technical advisory capacity, no member of a Board of Directors,
Trustees,
Overseers,
Advisory
Group, Special Issues Panel, Visiting Committee, or any similar entity of a defense
FFRDC, or any entity that contracts with
the Federal government to manage or operate one or more FFRDCs, or any paid consultant to a defense FFRDC shall receive
funds appropriated by this Act as compensation for services as a member of such entity:
Provided, That a member of any such entity
shall be allowed travel expenses and per
diem as authorized under the Federal Joint
Travel Regulations, when engaged in the performance of membership duties: Provided further, That except when acting in a technical
advisory capacity, no paid consultant shall
receive funds appropriated by this Act as
compensation by more than one FFRDC in a
calendar year.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, none of the funds available to the department from any source during the current
fiscal year may be used by a defense FFRDC,
through a fee or other payment mechanism,
for construction of new buildings not located
on a military installation, for payment of
cost sharing for projects funded by Government grants, for absorption of contract overruns, or for certain charitable contributions,
not to include employee participation in
community service and/or development.
(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, of the funds appropriated in this Act,
not more than $2,886,300,000 may be funded
for professional technical staff-related costs
of the defense FFRDCs: Provided, That within such funds, not more than $461,300,000
shall be available for the defense studies and
analysis FFRDCs: Provided further, That this
subsection shall not apply to staff years
funded in the National Intelligence Program
and the Military Intelligence Program: Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense
shall, with the submission of the department’s fiscal year 2027 budget request, submit a report presenting the specific amounts
of staff years of technical effort to be allocated for each defense FFRDC by program

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

during that fiscal year and the associated
budget estimates, by appropriation account
and program.
SEC. 8027. For the purposes of this Act, the
term ‘‘congressional defense committees’’
means the Armed Services Committee of the
House of Representatives, the Armed Services Committee of the Senate, the Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives, and the Subcommittee on Defense of
the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate.
SEC. 8028. For the purposes of this Act, the
term ‘‘congressional intelligence committees’’ means the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives, the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate, the Subcommittee on
Defense of the Committee on Appropriations
of the House of Representatives, and the
Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee
on Appropriations of the Senate.
SEC. 8029. During the current fiscal year,
the Department of Defense may acquire the
modification, depot maintenance and repair
of aircraft, vehicles and vessels as well as the
production of components and other Defenserelated articles, through competition between Department of Defense depot maintenance activities and private firms: Provided,
That the Senior Acquisition Executive of the
military department or Defense Agency concerned, with power of delegation, shall certify that successful bids include comparable
estimates of all direct and indirect costs for
both public and private bids: Provided further,
That Office of Management and Budget Circular A–76 shall not apply to competitions
conducted under this section.
SEC. 8030. (a) None of the funds appropriated in this Act may be expended by an
entity of the Department of Defense unless
the entity, in expending the funds, complies
with the Buy American Act. For purposes of
this subsection, the term ‘‘Buy American
Act’’ means chapter 83 of title 41, United
States Code.
(b) If the Secretary of Defense determines
that a person has been convicted of intentionally affixing a label bearing a ‘‘Made in
America’’ inscription to any product sold in
or shipped to the United States that is not
made in America, the Secretary shall determine, in accordance with section 4658 of title
10, United States Code, whether the person
should be debarred from contracting with
the Department of Defense.
(c) In the case of any equipment or products purchased with appropriations provided
under this Act, it is the sense of the Congress
that any entity of the Department of Defense, in expending the appropriation, purchase only American-made equipment and
products, provided that American-made
equipment and products are cost-competitive, quality competitive, and available in a
timely fashion.
SEC. 8031. None of the funds appropriated
or made available in this Act shall be used to
procure carbon, alloy, or armor steel plate
for use in any Government-owned facility or
property under the control of the Department of Defense which were not melted and
rolled in the United States or Canada: Provided, That these procurement restrictions
shall apply to any and all Federal Supply
Class 9515, American Society of Testing and
Materials (ASTM) or American Iron and
Steel Institute (AISI) specifications of carbon, alloy or armor steel plate: Provided further, That the Secretary of the military department responsible for the procurement
may waive this restriction on a case-by-case
basis by certifying in writing to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate that adequate
domestic supplies are not available to meet

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1201

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Department of Defense requirements on a
timely basis and that such an acquisition
must be made in order to acquire capability
for national security purposes: Provided further, That these restrictions shall not apply
to contracts which are in being as of the date
of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 8032. (a)(1) If the Secretary of Defense,
after consultation with the United States
Trade Representative, determines that a foreign country which is party to an agreement
described in paragraph (2) has violated the
terms of the agreement by discriminating
against certain types of products produced in
the United States that are covered by the
agreement, the Secretary of Defense shall rescind the Secretary’s blanket waiver of the
Buy American Act with respect to such
types of products produced in that foreign
country.
(2) An agreement referred to in paragraph
(1) is any reciprocal defense procurement
memorandum of understanding, between the
United States and a foreign country pursuant to which the Secretary of Defense has
prospectively waived the Buy American Act
for certain products in that country.
(b) The Secretary of Defense shall submit
to the Congress a report on the amount of
Department of Defense purchases from foreign entities in fiscal year 2026. Such report
shall separately indicate the dollar value of
items for which the Buy American Act was
waived pursuant to any agreement described
in subsection (a)(2), the Trade Agreements
Act of 1979 (19 U.S.C. 2501 et seq.), or any
international agreement to which the United
States is a party.
(c) For purposes of this section, the term
‘‘Buy American Act’’ means chapter 83 of
title 41, United States Code.
SEC. 8033. None of the funds appropriated
by this Act may be used for the procurement
of ball and roller bearings other than those
produced by a domestic source and of domestic origin: Provided, That the Secretary of
the military department responsible for such
procurement may waive this restriction on a
case-by-case basis by certifying in writing to
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate,
that adequate domestic supplies are not
available to meet Department of Defense requirements on a timely basis and that such
an acquisition must be made in order to acquire capability for national security purposes: Provided further, That this restriction
shall not apply to the purchase of ‘‘commercial products’’, as defined by section 103 of
title 41, United States Code, except that the
restriction shall apply to ball or roller bearings purchased as end items.
SEC. 8034. Of the amounts appropriated in
this Act under the heading ‘‘Operation and
Maintenance, Defense-Wide’’, for the Defense
Security Cooperation Agency, $50,000,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2027,
shall be available to the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Secretary of
State, to provide assistance to the Lebanese
Armed Forces, including training, equipment, logistics support, supplies and services, stipends, infrastructure repair and renovation, and sustainment: Provided, That the
Secretary of Defense shall ensure that the
Lebanese Armed Forces are vetted prior to
providing assistance, including at a minimum, assessing for associations with terrorist groups and receiving a commitment to
promote respect for human rights and the
rule of law: Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense shall, not fewer than 15
days prior to obligating the funds provided
in this section, notify the congressional defense committees in writing of the details of
any such obligation: Provided further, That
the Secretary of Defense may waive a provision of law relating to the acquisition of

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

items and support services or sections 40 and
40A of the Arms Export Control Act (22
U.S.C. 2780 and 2785) if the Secretary determines that such provision of law would prohibit, restrict, delay or otherwise limit the
provision of such assistance and a notice of
and justification for such waiver is submitted to the congressional defense committees, the Committees on Appropriations and
Foreign Relations of the Senate and the
Committees on Appropriations and Foreign
Affairs of the House of Representatives: Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense
shall provide quarterly reports to the congressional defense committees on the use of
funds provided in this section, including, but
not limited to, the number of individuals
trained within the Lebanese Armed Forces,
the nature and scope of support and
sustainment provided to the Lebanese Armed
Forces, the area of operations for the Lebanese Armed Forces, and the contributions of
other countries, groups, or individuals.
SEC. 8035. None of the funds in this Act
may be used to purchase any supercomputer
which is not manufactured in the United
States, unless the Secretary of Defense certifies to the congressional defense committees that such an acquisition must be made
in order to acquire capability for national security purposes that is not available from
United States manufacturers.
SEC. 8036. (a) The Secretary of Defense
may, on a case-by-case basis, waive with respect to a foreign country each limitation on
the procurement of defense items from foreign sources provided in law if the Secretary
determines that the application of the limitation with respect to that country would invalidate cooperative programs entered into
between the Department of Defense and the
foreign country, or would invalidate reciprocal trade agreements for the procurement
of defense items entered into under section
4851 of title 10, United States Code, and the
country does not discriminate against the
same or similar defense items produced in
the United States for that country.
(b) Subsection (a) applies with respect to—
(1) contracts and subcontracts entered into
on or after the date of the enactment of this
Act; and
(2) options for the procurement of items
that are exercised after such date under contracts that are entered into before such date
if the option prices are adjusted for any reason other than the application of a waiver
granted under subsection (a).
(c) Subsection (a) does not apply to a limitation regarding construction of public vessels, ball and roller bearings, food, and clothing or textile materials as defined by section
XI (chapters 50–65) of the Harmonized Tariff
Schedule of the United States and products
classified under headings 4010, 4202, 4203, 6401
through 6406, 6505, 7019, 7218 through 7229,
7304.41 through 7304.49, 7306.40, 7502 through
7508, 8105, 8108, 8109, 8211, 8215, and 9404.
SEC. 8037. None of the funds made available
in this Act, or any subsequent Act making
appropriations for the Department of Defense, may be used for the purchase or manufacture of a flag of the United States unless
such flags are treated as covered items under
section 4862(b) of title 10, United States
Code.
SEC. 8038. During the current fiscal year,
amounts contained in the Department of Defense Overseas Military Facility Investment
Recovery Account shall be available until
expended for the payments specified by section 2687a(b)(2) of title 10, United States
Code.
SEC. 8039. During the current fiscal year,
appropriations which are available to the Department of Defense for operation and maintenance may be used to purchase items having an investment item unit cost of not more

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1202

than $350,000: Provided, That upon determination by the Secretary of Defense that such
action is necessary to meet the operational
requirements of a Commander of a Combatant Command engaged in a named contingency operation overseas, such funds may be
used to purchase items having an investment
item unit cost of not more than $500,000.
SEC. 8040. Up to $16,809,000 of the funds appropriated under the heading ‘‘Operation and
Maintenance, Navy’’ may be made available
for the Asia Pacific Regional Initiative Program for the purpose of enabling the United
States Indo-Pacific Command to execute
Theater Security Cooperation activities such
as humanitarian assistance, and payment of
incremental and personnel costs of training
and exercising with foreign security forces:
Provided, That funds made available for this
purpose may be used, notwithstanding any
other funding authorities for humanitarian
assistance, security assistance or combined
exercise expenses: Provided further, That
funds may not be obligated to provide assistance to any foreign country that is otherwise prohibited from receiving such type of
assistance under any other provision of law.
SEC. 8041. The Secretary of Defense shall
issue regulations to prohibit the sale of any
tobacco or tobacco-related products in military resale outlets in the United States, its
territories and possessions at a price below
the most competitive price in the local community: Provided, That such regulations
shall direct that the prices of tobacco or tobacco-related products in overseas military
retail outlets shall be within the range of
prices established for military retail system
stores located in the United States.
SEC. 8042. (a) During the current fiscal
year, none of the appropriations or funds
available to the Department of Defense
Working Capital Funds shall be used for the
purchase of an investment item for the purpose of acquiring a new inventory item for
sale or anticipated sale during the current
fiscal year or a subsequent fiscal year to customers of the Department of Defense Working Capital Funds if such an item would not
have been chargeable to the Department of
Defense Business Operations Fund during fiscal year 1994 and if the purchase of such an
investment item would be chargeable during
the current fiscal year to appropriations
made to the Department of Defense for procurement.
(b) The fiscal year 2027 budget request for
the Department of Defense as well as all justification material and other documentation
supporting the fiscal year 2027 Department of
Defense budget shall be prepared and submitted to the Congress on the basis that any
equipment which was classified as an end
item and funded in a procurement appropriation contained in this Act shall be budgeted
for in a proposed fiscal year 2027 procurement appropriation and not in the supply
management business area or any other area
or category of the Department of Defense
Working Capital Funds.
SEC. 8043. None of the funds appropriated
by this Act for programs of the Central Intelligence Agency shall remain available for
obligation beyond the current fiscal year, except for funds appropriated for the Reserve
for Contingencies, which shall remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That
funds appropriated, transferred, or otherwise
credited to the Central Intelligence Agency
Central Services Working Capital Fund during this or any prior fiscal year shall remain
available until expended: Provided further,
That any funds appropriated or transferred
to the Central Intelligence Agency for advanced research and development acquisition, for agent operations, and for covert action programs authorized by the President
under section 503 of the National Security

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3093) shall remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided further, That any funds appropriated or transferred to the Central Intelligence Agency for
the construction, improvement, or alteration
of facilities, including leased facilities, to be
used primarily by personnel of the intelligence community, shall remain available
until September 30, 2028.
SEC. 8044. (a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), none of the funds made
available by this Act may be used—
(1) to establish a field operating agency; or
(2) to pay the basic pay of a member of the
Armed Forces or civilian employee of the
Department of Defense who is transferred or
reassigned from a headquarters activity if
the member or employee’s place of duty remains at the location of that headquarters.
(b) The Secretary of Defense or Secretary
of a military department may waive the limitations in subsection (a), on a case-by-case
basis, if the Secretary determines, and certifies to the Committees on Appropriations
of the House of Representatives and the Senate that the granting of the waiver will reduce the personnel requirements or the financial requirements of the department.
(c) This section does not apply to—
(1) field operating agencies funded within
the National Intelligence Program;
(2) an Army field operating agency established to eliminate, mitigate, or counter the
effects of improvised explosive devices, and,
as determined by the Secretary of the Army,
other similar threats;
(3) an Army field operating agency established to improve the effectiveness and efficiencies of biometric activities and to integrate
common
biometric
technologies
throughout the Department of Defense; or
(4) an Air Force field operating agency established to administer the Air Force Mortuary Affairs Program and Mortuary Operations for the Department of Defense and authorized Federal entities.
SEC. 8045. (a) None of the funds appropriated by this Act shall be available to convert to contractor performance an activity
or function of the Department of Defense
that, on or after the date of the enactment of
this Act, is performed by Department of Defense civilian employees unless—
(1) the conversion is based on the result of
a public-private competition that includes a
most efficient and cost effective organization plan developed by such activity or function;
(2) the Competitive Sourcing Official determines that, over all performance periods
stated in the solicitation of offers for performance of the activity or function, the
cost of performance of the activity or function by a contractor would be less costly to
the Department of Defense by an amount
that equals or exceeds the lesser of—
(A) 10 percent of the most efficient organization’s personnel-related costs for performance of that activity or function by Federal
employees; or
(B) $10,000,000; and
(3) the contractor does not receive an advantage for a proposal that would reduce
costs for the Department of Defense by—
(A) not making an employer-sponsored
health insurance plan available to the workers who are to be employed in the performance of that activity or function under the
contract; or
(B) offering to such workers an employersponsored health benefits plan that requires
the employer to contribute less towards the
premium or subscription share than the
amount that is paid by the Department of
Defense for health benefits for civilian employees under chapter 89 of title 5, United
States Code.
(b)(1) The Department of Defense, without
regard to subsection (a) of this section or

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

subsection (a), (b), or (c) of section 2461 of
title 10, United States Code, and notwithstanding any administrative regulation, requirement, or policy to the contrary shall
have full authority to enter into a contract
for the performance of any commercial or industrial type function of the Department of
Defense that—
(A) is included on the procurement list established pursuant to section 2 of the JavitsWagner-O’Day Act (section 8503 of title 41,
United States Code);
(B) is planned to be converted to performance by a qualified nonprofit agency for the
blind or by a qualified nonprofit agency for
other severely handicapped individuals in accordance with that Act; or
(C) is planned to be converted to performance by a qualified firm under at least 51 percent ownership by an Indian tribe, as defined
in section 4(e) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C.
450b(e)), or a Native Hawaiian Organization,
as defined in section 8(a)(15) of the Small
Business Act (15 U.S.C. 637(a)(15)).
(2) This section shall not apply to depot
contracts or contracts for depot maintenance as provided in sections 2469 and 2474 of
title 10, United States Code.
(c) The conversion of any activity or function of the Department of Defense under the
authority provided by this section shall be
credited toward any competitive or outsourcing goal, target, or measurement that
may be established by statute, regulation, or
policy and is deemed to be awarded under the
authority of, and in compliance with, subsection (h) of section 2304 of title 10, United
States Code, for the competition or outsourcing of commercial activities.
(RESCISSIONS)

SEC. 8046. Of the funds appropriated in Department of Defense Appropriations Acts,
the following funds are hereby rescinded
from the following accounts and programs in
the specified amounts: Provided, That no
amounts may be rescinded from amounts
that were designated by the Congress as an
emergency requirement pursuant to a concurrent resolution on the budget or the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control
Act of 1985:
‘‘Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy: FFG–
Frigate’’, 2020/2031, $240,245,000;
‘‘Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy: FFG–
Frigate’’, 2022/2026, $418,624,000;
‘‘Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy: FFG–
Frigate’’, 2023/2027, $483,391,000;
‘‘Cooperative Threat Reduction Account’’,
2024/2026, $33,936,000;
‘‘Other Procurement, Army’’, 2024/2026,
$15,000,000;
‘‘Weapons Procurement, Navy’’, 2024/2026,
$2,943,000;
‘‘Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy: FFG–
Frigate’’, 2024/2028, $1,271,572,000;
‘‘Aircraft Procurement, Air Force’’, 2024/
2026, $25,397,000;
‘‘Missile Procurement, Air Force’’, 2024/
2026, $41,189,000;
‘‘Procurement, Space Force’’, 2024/2026,
$107,100,000;
‘‘Defense Health Program’’, 2024/2026,
$10,473,000;
‘‘Counter-Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
Train and Equip Fund’’, 2025/2026, $50,000,000;
‘‘Procurement of Weapons and Tracked
Combat
Vehicles,
Army’’,
2025/2027,
$452,647,000;
‘‘Other Procurement, Army’’, 2025/2027,
$119,887,000;
‘‘Aircraft Procurement, Navy’’, 2025/2027,
$155,711,000;
‘‘Weapons Procurement, Navy’’, 2025/2027,
$200,272,000;
‘‘Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy: FFG–
Frigate’’, 2025/2029, $151,230,000;

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

‘‘Aircraft Procurement, Air Force’’, 2025/
2027, $193,555,000;
‘‘Missile Procurement, Air Force’’, 2025/
2027, $209,045,000;
‘‘Other Procurement, Air Force’’, 2025/2027,
$186,638,000;
‘‘Procurement, Space Force’’, 2025/2027,
$339,196,000;
‘‘Procurement, Defense-Wide’’, 2025/2027,
$11,807,000;
‘‘Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Army’’, 2025/2026, $178,735,000;
‘‘Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Navy’’, 2025/2026, $82,461,000;
‘‘Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Air Force’’, 2025/2026, $329,435,000;
‘‘Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Space Force’’, 2025/2026, $370,149,000; and
‘‘Defense Modernization Account , DefenseWide’’, 2025/2028, $28,249,000.
SEC. 8047. None of the funds available in
this Act may be used to reduce the authorized positions for military technicians (dual
status) of the Army National Guard, Air National Guard, Army Reserve and Air Force
Reserve for the purpose of applying any administratively imposed civilian personnel
ceiling, freeze, or reduction on military technicians (dual status), unless such reductions
are a direct result of a reduction in military
force structure.
SEC. 8048. None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available in this Act may
be obligated or expended for assistance to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
unless specifically appropriated for that purpose: Provided, That this restriction shall not
apply to any activities incidental to the Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency mission
to recover and identify the remains of United
States Armed Forces personnel from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
SEC. 8049. (a) None of the funds available to
the Department of Defense for any fiscal
year for drug interdiction or counter-drug
activities may be transferred to any other
department or agency of the United States
except as specifically provided in an appropriations law.
(b) None of the funds available to the Central Intelligence Agency for any fiscal year
for drug interdiction or counter-drug activities may be transferred to any other department or agency of the United States except
as specifically provided in an appropriations
law.
SEC. 8050. In addition to the amounts appropriated or otherwise made available elsewhere in this Act, $49,000,000 is hereby appropriated to the Department of Defense: Provided, That upon the determination of the
Secretary of Defense that it shall serve the
national interest, the Secretary shall make
grants in the amounts specified as follows:
$24,000,000 to the United Service Organizations and $25,000,000 to the Red Cross.
SEC. 8051. Notwithstanding any other provision in this Act, the Small Business Innovation Research program and the Small
Business Technology Transfer program setasides shall be taken proportionally from all
programs, projects, or activities to the extent they contribute to the extramural budget. The Secretary of each military department, the Director of each Defense Agency,
and the head of each other relevant component of the Department of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees, concurrent with submission of the
budget justification documents to Congress
pursuant to section 1105 of title 31, United
States Code, a report with a detailed accounting of the Small Business Innovation
Research program and the Small Business
Technology Transfer program set-asides
taken from programs, projects, or activities
within such department, agency, or component during the most recently completed fiscal year.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1203

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

SEC. 8052. None of the funds available to
the Department of Defense under this Act
shall be obligated or expended to pay a contractor under a contract with the Department of Defense for costs of any amount paid
by the contractor to an employee when—
(1) such costs are for a bonus or otherwise
in excess of the normal salary paid by the
contractor to the employee; and
(2) such bonus is part of restructuring costs
associated with a business combination.
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8053. During the current fiscal year,
no more than $30,000,000 of appropriations
made in this Act under the heading ‘‘Operation and Maintenance, Defense-Wide’’ may
be transferred to appropriations available for
the pay of military personnel, to be merged
with, and to be available for the same time
period as the appropriations to which transferred, to be used in support of such personnel in connection with support and services for eligible organizations and activities
outside the Department of Defense pursuant
to section 2012 of title 10, United States
Code.
SEC. 8054. (a) Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, the Chief of the National
Guard Bureau may permit the use of equipment of the National Guard Distance Learning Project by any person or entity on a
space-available, reimbursable basis. The
Chief of the National Guard Bureau shall establish the amount of reimbursement for
such use on a case-by-case basis.
(b) Amounts collected under subsection (a)
shall be credited to funds available for the
National Guard Distance Learning Project
and be available to defray the costs associated with the use of equipment of the project
under that subsection. Such funds shall be
available for such purposes without fiscal
year limitation.
SEC. 8055. (a) None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this
or prior Acts may be obligated or expended
to retire, prepare to retire, or place in storage or on backup aircraft inventory status
any C–40 aircraft.
(b) The limitation under subsection (a)
shall not apply to an individual C–40 aircraft
that the Secretary of the Air Force determines, on a case-by-case basis, to be no
longer mission capable due to a Class A mishap.
(c) If the Secretary determines under subsection (b) that an aircraft is no longer mission capable, the Secretary shall submit to
the congressional defense committees a certification in writing that the status of such
aircraft is due to a Class A mishap and not
due to lack of maintenance, repairs, or other
reasons.
(d) Not later than 90 days after the date of
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of
Defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the necessary
steps taken by the Department of Defense to
meet the travel requirements for official or
representational duties of members of Congress and the Cabinet in fiscal years 2026 and
2027.
SEC. 8056. (a) None of the funds appropriated in title IV of this Act may be used to
procure end-items for delivery to military
forces for operational training, operational
use, or inventory requirements: Provided,
That this restriction does not apply to enditems used in development, prototyping in
accordance with an approved test strategy,
and test activities preceding and leading to
acceptance for operational use.
(b) If the number of end-items budgeted
with funds appropriated in title IV of this
Act exceeds the number required in an approved test strategy, the Under Secretary of
Defense (Research and Engineering) and the

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition and
Sustainment), in coordination with the responsible Service Acquisition Executive,
shall certify in writing to the congressional
defense committees that there is a bonafide
need for the additional end-items at the time
of submittal to Congress of the budget of the
President for fiscal year 2027 pursuant to section 1105 of title 31, United States Code: Provided, That this restriction does not apply to
programs funded within the National Intelligence Program.
(c) The Secretary of Defense shall, at the
time of the submittal to Congress of the
budget of the President for fiscal year 2027
pursuant to section 1105 of title 31, United
States Code, submit to the congressional defense committees a report detailing the use
of funds requested in research, development,
test and evaluation accounts for end-items
used in development, prototyping and test
activities preceding and leading to acceptance for operational use: Provided, That the
report shall set forth, for each end item covered by the preceding proviso, a detailed list
of the statutory authorities under which
amounts in the accounts described in that
proviso were used for such item: Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense shall, at
the time of the submittal to Congress of the
budget of the President for fiscal year 2027
pursuant to section 1105 of title 31, United
States Code, submit to the congressional defense committees a certification that funds
requested for fiscal year 2027 in research, development, test and evaluation accounts are
in compliance with this section: Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense may
waive this restriction on a case-by-case basis
by certifying in writing to the Subcommittees on Defense of the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate that it is in the national security interest to do so.
SEC. 8057. None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available by this or other
Department of Defense Appropriations Acts
may be obligated or expended for the purpose
of performing repairs or maintenance to
military family housing units of the Department of Defense, including areas in such
military family housing units that may be
used for the purpose of conducting official
Department of Defense business.
SEC. 8058. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, funds appropriated in this Act
under the heading ‘‘Research, Development,
Test and Evaluation, Defense-Wide’’ for any
new start Defense Innovation Acceleration
(PE 0603838D8Z) or Rapid Prototyping Program (PE 0604331D8Z) demonstration project
with a value of more than $5,000,000 may only
be obligated 15 days after a report, including
a description of the project, the planned acquisition and transition strategy and its estimated annual and total cost, has been provided in writing to the congressional defense
committees: Provided, That the Secretary of
Defense may waive this restriction on a caseby-case basis by certifying to the congressional defense committees that it is in the
national interest to do so.
SEC. 8059. The Secretary of Defense shall
continue to provide a classified quarterly report to the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate,
Subcommittees on Defense on certain matters as directed in the classified annex accompanying this Act.
SEC. 8060. Notwithstanding section 12310(b)
of title 10, United States Code, a servicemember who is a member of the National
Guard serving on full-time National Guard
duty under section 502(f) of title 32, United
States Code, may perform duties in support
of the ground-based elements of the National
Ballistic Missile Defense System.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1204

SEC. 8061. None of the funds provided in
this Act may be used to transfer to any nongovernmental entity ammunition held by
the Department of Defense that has a centerfire cartridge and a United States military
nomenclature designation of ‘‘armor penetrator’’, ‘‘armor piercing (AP)’’, ‘‘armor
piercing incendiary (API)’’, ‘‘armor-piercing
incendiary tracer (API–T)’’, ‘‘general purpose
(GP)’’, ‘‘special purpose (SP)’’ except 9mm,
or ‘‘enhanced performance round (EPR)’’, except to an entity performing demilitarization services for the Department of Defense
under a contract that requires the entity to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Department of Defense that the above listed
projectiles are either: (1) rendered incapable
of reuse by the demilitarization process; or
(2) used to manufacture ammunition pursuant to a contract with the Department of Defense or the manufacture of ammunition for
export pursuant to a License for Permanent
Export of Unclassified Military Articles
issued by the Department of State.
SEC. 8062. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Chief of the National
Guard Bureau, or their designee, may waive
payment of all or part of the consideration
that otherwise would be required under section 2667 of title 10, United States Code, in
the case of a lease of personal property for a
period not in excess of 1 year to any organization specified in section 508(d) of title 32,
United States Code, or any other youth, social, or fraternal nonprofit organization as
may be approved by the Chief of the National
Guard Bureau, or their designee, on a caseby-case basis.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8063. Of the amounts appropriated in
this Act under the heading ‘‘Operation and
Maintenance, Army’’, $218,015,597 shall remain available until expended: Provided,
That, notwithstanding any other provision
of law, the Secretary of Defense is authorized to transfer such funds to other activities
of the Federal Government: Provided further,
That the Secretary of Defense is authorized
to enter into and carry out contracts for the
acquisition of real property, construction,
personal services, and operations related to
projects carrying out the purposes of this
section: Provided further, That contracts entered into under the authority of this section
may provide for such indemnification as the
Secretary determines to be necessary: Provided further, That projects authorized by
this section shall comply with applicable
Federal, State, and local law to the maximum extent consistent with the national security, as determined by the Secretary of
Defense.
SEC. 8064. (a) None of the funds appropriated in this or any other Act, including
prior year Acts, may be used to implement a
change to—
(1) the appropriations account structure
for the National Intelligence Program budget, including through the creation of a new
appropriation or new appropriation account;
(2) how the National Intelligence Program
budget request is presented in the unclassified P–1, R–1, and O–1 documents supporting
the Department of Defense budget request;
(3) the process by which the National Intelligence Program appropriations are apportioned to the executing agencies; or
(4) the process by which the National Intelligence Program appropriations are allotted,
obligated and disbursed.
(b) Nothing in subsection (a) shall be construed to prohibit the merger of programs or
changes to the National Intelligence Program budget at or below the Expenditure
Center level, provided such change is otherwise in accordance with subsection (a).
(c) The Director of National Intelligence
and the Secretary of Defense may jointly

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

study and develop detailed proposals for alternative budget presentation and appropriation accounts. Such study shall include a
comprehensive counterintelligence risk assessment to ensure that none of the alternative processes will adversely affect counterintelligence.
(d) Upon development of the detailed proposals defined under subsection (c), the Director of National Intelligence and the Secretary of Defense shall—
(1) provide the proposed alternatives to all
affected agencies;
(2) receive certification from all affected
agencies attesting that the proposed alternatives will not adversely affect counterintelligence; and
(3) not later than 30 days after receiving all
necessary certifications under paragraph (2),
present the proposed alternatives and certifications to the congressional defense and intelligence committees.
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8065. In addition to amounts made
available elsewhere in this Act, $25,000,000 is
hereby appropriated to the Department of
Defense and made available for transfer to
operation and maintenance accounts, procurement accounts, and research, development, test and evaluation accounts only for
those efforts by the Commander, United
States Africa Command to expand cooperation, share operational information, advance
interoperability, or improve the capabilities
of our allies and partners in their area of operation: Provided, That none of the funds provided under this section may be obligated or
expended until 30 days after the Secretary of
Defense provides to the congressional defense committees an execution plan: Provided
further, That not less than 15 days prior to
any transfer of funds, the Secretary of Defense shall notify the congressional defense
committees of the details of any such transfer: Provided further, That upon transfer, the
funds shall be merged with and available for
the same purposes, and for the same time period, as the appropriation to which transferred: Provided further, That the transfer authority provided under this section is in addition to any other transfer authority provided elsewhere in this Act.
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8066. During the current fiscal year,
not to exceed $11,000,000 from each of the appropriations made in title II of this Act for
‘‘Operation and Maintenance, Army’’, ‘‘Operation and Maintenance, Navy’’, and ‘‘Operation and Maintenance, Air Force’’ may be
transferred by the military department concerned to its central fund established for
Fisher Houses and Suites pursuant to section
2493(d) of title 10, United States Code.
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8067. In addition to amounts provided
elsewhere in this Act, $5,000,000 is hereby appropriated to the Department of Defense, to
remain available for obligation until expended: Provided, That notwithstanding any
other provision of law, that upon the determination of the Secretary of Defense that it
shall serve the national interest, these funds
shall be available only for a grant to the
Fisher House Foundation, Inc., only for the
construction and furnishing of additional
Fisher Houses to meet the needs of military
family members when confronted with the
illness or hospitalization of an eligible military beneficiary.
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8068. Of the amounts appropriated for
‘‘Operation and Maintenance, Navy’’, up to
$1,000,000 shall be available for transfer to
the John C. Stennis Center for Public Service Development Trust Fund established
under section 116 of the John C. Stennis Cen-

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ter for Public Service Training and Development Act (2 U.S.C. 1105).
SEC. 8069. None of the funds available to
the Department of Defense may be obligated
to modify command and control relationships to give Fleet Forces Command operational and administrative control of United
States Navy forces assigned to the Pacific
fleet: Provided, That the command and control relationships which existed on October
1, 2004, shall remain in force until a written
modification has been proposed to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate: Provided further, That the proposed modification may be
implemented 30 days after the notification
unless an objection is received from either
the House or Senate Appropriations Committees: Provided further, That any proposed
modification shall not preclude the ability of
the commander of United States Indo-Pacific
Command to meet operational requirements.
SEC. 8070. Any notice that is required to be
submitted to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate under section 3601 of title 10,
United States Code, as added by section
804(a) of the James M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023
shall be submitted pursuant to that requirement concurrently to the Subcommittees on
Defense of the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate.
SEC. 8071. Of the amounts appropriated in
this Act under the headings ‘‘Procurement,
Defense-Wide’’ and ‘‘Research, Development,
Test
and
Evaluation,
Defense-Wide’’,
$500,000,000 shall be for the Israeli Cooperative Programs: Provided, That of this
amount, $60,000,000 shall be for the Secretary
of Defense to provide to the Government of
Israel for the procurement of the Iron Dome
defense system to counter short-range rocket threats, subject to the U.S.-Israel Iron
Dome Procurement Agreement, as amended;
$127,000,000 shall be for the Short Range Ballistic Missile Defense (SRBMD) program, including cruise missile defense research and
development under the SRBMD program;
$40,000,000 shall be for co-production activities of SRBMD systems in the United States
and in Israel to meet Israel’s defense requirements consistent with each nation’s laws,
regulations, and procedures, subject to the
U.S.-Israeli co-production agreement for
SRBMD, as amended; $100,000,000 shall be for
an upper-tier component to the Israeli Missile
Defense
Architecture,
of
which
$100,000,000 shall be for co-production activities of Arrow 3 Upper Tier systems in the
United States and in Israel to meet Israel’s
defense requirements consistent with each
nation’s laws, regulations, and procedures,
subject to the U.S.-Israeli co-production
agreement for Arrow 3 Upper Tier, as amended; and $173,000,000 shall be for the Arrow
System Improvement Program including development of a long range, ground and airborne, detection suite.
SEC. 8072. Of the amounts appropriated in
this Act under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding
and Conversion, Navy’’, $1,676,587,000 shall be
available until September 30, 2026, to fund
prior year shipbuilding cost increases for the
following programs:
(1) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2013/2026: Carrier Replacement Program, $150,000,000;
(2) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2016/2026: Virginia Class
Submarine Program, $121,538,000;
(3) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2016/2026: DDG 51 Program, $14,892,000;
(4) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2017/2026: Virginia Class
Submarine Program, $99,116,000;

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

(5) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2017/2026: DDG 51 Program, $62,365,000;
(6) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2017/2026: LHA Replacement Program, $93,603,000;
(7) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2018/2026: Virginia Class
Submarine Program, $289,761,000;
(8) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2018/2026: DDG 51 Program, $104,238,000;
(9) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2018/2026: LPD Flight II
Program, $93,442,000;
(10) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2018/2026: Oceanographic
Ships Program, $6,015,000;
(11) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2019/2026: Littoral Combat Ship Program, $5,766,000;
(12) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2019/2026: T–AO Fleet
Oiler Program, $15,400,000;
(13) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2019/2026: Ship to Shore
Connector Program, $15,480,000;
(14) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2020/2026: CVN Refueling
Overhauls, $483,100,000;
(15) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2020/2026: T–AO Fleet
Oiler Program, $48,260,000;
(16) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2022/2026: T–AO Fleet
Oiler Program, $19,650,000;
(17) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2022/2026: Expeditionary
Sea Base Program, $30,000,000;
(18) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2022/2026: Expeditionary
Fast Transport Program, $11,231,000;
(19) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2023/2026: T–AO Fleet
Oiler Program, $6,530,000; and
(20) Under the heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and
Conversion, Navy’’, 2024/2026: T–AO Fleet
Oiler Program, $6,200,000.
SEC. 8073. Funds appropriated by this Act,
or made available by the transfer of funds in
this Act, for intelligence activities and intelligence-related activities not otherwise authorized in the Intelligence Authorization
Act for Fiscal Year 2026 are deemed to be
specifically authorized by the Congress for
purposes of section 504 of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3094).
SEC. 8074. None of the funds provided in
this Act shall be available for obligation or
expenditure through a reprogramming of
funds that creates or initiates a new program, project, or activity unless such program, project, or activity must be undertaken immediately in the interest of national security and only after written prior
notification to the congressional defense
committees.
SEC. 8075. None of the funds in this Act
may be used for research, development, test,
evaluation, procurement or deployment of
nuclear armed interceptors of a missile defense system.
SEC. 8076. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be obligated or expended for
the purpose of decommissioning more than
one Littoral Combat Ship.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8077. The Secretary of Defense may
transfer funds from any available Department of the Navy appropriation (except military construction) to any available Navy
ship construction appropriation for the purpose of liquidating necessary changes resulting from inflation, market fluctuations, or
rate adjustments for any ship construction
program appropriated in law: Provided, That
the Secretary may transfer not to exceed

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1205

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

$40,000,000 under the authority provided by
this section: Provided further, That the Secretary may not transfer any funds until 30
days after the proposed transfer has been reported to the Committees on Appropriations
of the House of Representatives and the Senate, unless a response from the Committees
is received sooner: Provided further, That any
funds transferred pursuant to this section
shall retain the same period of availability
as when originally appropriated: Provided
further, That the transfer authority provided
under this section is in addition to any other
transfer authority contained elsewhere in
this Act: Provided further, That the transfer
authority provided by this section expires on
September 30, 2030.
SEC. 8078. None of the funds appropriated
or made available in this Act shall be used to
reduce or disestablish the operation of the
53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron of
the Air Force Reserve, if such action would
reduce the WC–130 Weather Reconnaissance
mission below the levels funded in this Act:
Provided, That the Air Force shall allow the
53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron to
perform other missions in support of national defense requirements during the nonhurricane season.
SEC. 8079. None of the funds provided in
this Act shall be available for integration of
foreign intelligence information unless the
information has been lawfully collected and
processed during the conduct of authorized
foreign intelligence activities: Provided, That
information pertaining to United States persons shall only be handled in accordance
with protections provided in the Fourth
Amendment of the United States Constitution as implemented through Executive
Order No. 12333.
SEC. 8080. None of the funds appropriated
by this Act for programs of the Office of the
Director of National Intelligence shall remain available for obligation beyond the
current fiscal year, except for funds appropriated for research and technology, which
shall remain available until September 30,
2027.
SEC. 8081. For purposes of section 1553(b) of
title 31, United States Code, any subdivision
of appropriations made in this Act under the
heading ‘‘Shipbuilding and Conversion,
Navy’’ shall be considered to be for the same
purpose as any subdivision under the heading
‘‘Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy’’ appropriations in any prior fiscal year, and the 1
percent limitation shall apply to the total
amount of the appropriation.
SEC. 8082. (a) Not later than 60 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of National Intelligence shall submit a
report to the congressional intelligence committees to establish the baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for fiscal year 2026: Provided, That the
report shall include—
(1) a table for each appropriation with a
separate column to display the President’s
budget request, adjustments made by Congress, adjustments due to enacted rescissions, if appropriate, and the fiscal year enacted level;
(2) a delineation in the table for each appropriation by Expenditure Center and
project; and
(3) an identification of items of special
congressional interest.
(b) None of the funds provided for the National Intelligence Program in this Act shall
be available for reprogramming or transfer
until the report identified in subsection (a) is
submitted to the congressional intelligence
committees, unless the Director of National
Intelligence certifies in writing to the congressional intelligence committees that such
reprogramming or transfer is necessary as an
emergency requirement.

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SEC. 8083. Any transfer of amounts appropriated to the Department of Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Account in or
for fiscal year 2026 to a military department
or Defense Agency pursuant to section
1705(e)(1) of title 10, United States Code,
shall be covered by and subject to section
8005 of this Act.
SEC. 8084. (a) None of the funds provided for
the National Intelligence Program in this or
any prior appropriations Act shall be available for obligation or expenditure through a
reprogramming or transfer of funds in accordance with section 102A(d) of the National
Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3024(d)) that—
(1) creates a new start effort;
(2) terminates a program with appropriated
funding of $10,000,000 or more;
(3) transfers funding into or out of the National Intelligence Program; or
(4) transfers funding between appropriations, unless the congressional intelligence
committees are notified 30 days in advance
of such reprogramming of funds; this notification period may be reduced for urgent national security requirements.
(b) None of the funds provided for the National Intelligence Program in this or any
prior appropriations Act shall be available
for obligation or expenditure through a reprogramming or transfer of funds in accordance with section 102A(d) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3024(d)) that results in a cumulative increase or decrease of
the levels specified in the classified annex
accompanying the Act unless the congressional intelligence committees are notified
30 days in advance of such reprogramming of
funds; this notification period may be reduced for urgent national security requirements.
SEC. 8085. (a) Any agency receiving funds
made available in this Act, shall, subject to
subsections (b) and (c), post on the public
website of that agency any report required
to be submitted by the Congress in this or
any other Act, upon the determination by
the head of the agency that it shall serve the
national interest.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply to a report if—
(1) the public posting of the report compromises national security; or
(2) the report contains proprietary information.
(c) The head of the agency posting such report shall do so only after such report has
been made available to the requesting Committee or Committees of Congress for no less
than 45 days.
SEC. 8086. (a) None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this
Act may be expended for any Federal contract for an amount in excess of $1,000,000,
unless the contractor agrees not to—
(1) enter into any agreement with any of
its employees or independent contractors
that requires, as a condition of employment,
that the employee or independent contractor
agree to resolve through arbitration any
claim under title VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964 or any tort related to or arising out
of sexual assault or harassment, including
assault and battery, intentional infliction of
emotional distress, false imprisonment, or
negligent hiring, supervision, or retention;
or
(2) take any action to enforce any provision of an existing agreement with an employee or independent contractor that mandates that the employee or independent contractor resolve through arbitration any
claim under title VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964 or any tort related to or arising out
of sexual assault or harassment, including
assault and battery, intentional infliction of
emotional distress, false imprisonment, or
negligent hiring, supervision, or retention.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1206

(b) None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this Act may be expended for any Federal contract unless the
contractor certifies that it requires each
covered subcontractor to agree not to enter
into, and not to take any action to enforce
any provision of, any agreement as described
in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a),
with respect to any employee or independent
contractor performing work related to such
subcontract. For purposes of this subsection,
a ‘‘covered subcontractor’’ is an entity that
has a subcontract in excess of $1,000,000 on a
contract subject to subsection (a).
(c) The prohibitions in this section do not
apply with respect to a contractor’s or subcontractor’s agreements with employees or
independent contractors that may not be enforced in a court of the United States.
(d) The Secretary of Defense may waive
the application of subsection (a) or (b) to a
particular contractor or subcontractor for
the purposes of a particular contract or subcontract if the Secretary or the Deputy Secretary personally determines that the waiver
is necessary to avoid harm to national security interests of the United States, and that
the term of the contract or subcontract is
not longer than necessary to avoid such
harm. The determination shall set forth with
specificity the grounds for the waiver and for
the contract or subcontract term selected,
and shall state any alternatives considered
in lieu of a waiver and the reasons each such
alternative would not avoid harm to national security interests of the United
States. The Secretary of Defense shall transmit to Congress, and simultaneously make
public, any determination under this subsection not less than 15 business days before
the contract or subcontract addressed in the
determination may be awarded.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8087. From within the funds appropriated for operation and maintenance for
the Defense Health Program in this Act, up
to $165,000,000, shall be available for transfer
to the Joint Department of Defense—Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Facility
Demonstration Fund in accordance with the
provisions of section 1704 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010,
Public Law 111–84: Provided, That for purposes of section 1704(b), the facility operations funded are operations of the integrated Captain James A. Lovell Federal
Health Care Center, consisting of the North
Chicago Veterans Affairs Medical Center, the
Navy Ambulatory Care Center, and supporting facilities designated as a combined
Federal medical facility as described by section 706 of Public Law 110–417: Provided further, That additional funds may be transferred from funds appropriated for operation
and maintenance for the Defense Health Program to the Joint Department of Defense—
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Facility Demonstration Fund upon written notification by the Secretary of Defense to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate.
SEC. 8088. Notwithstanding price or other
limitations applicable to the purchase of
passenger carrying vehicles, appropriations
available to the Department of Defense may
be used for the purchase of: (1) heavy and
light armored vehicles for the physical security of personnel or for force protection purposes up to a limit of $450,000 per vehicle; and
(2) passenger motor vehicles up to a limit of
$75,000 per vehicle for use by military and civilian employees of the Department of Defense in the United States Central Command
area of responsibility.
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8089. Upon a determination by the Director of National Intelligence that such ac-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

tion is necessary and in the national interest, the Director may, with the approval of
the Director of the Office of Management
and Budget, transfer not to exceed
$1,500,000,000 of the funds made available in
this Act for the National Intelligence Program: Provided, That such authority to
transfer may not be used unless for higher
priority items, based on unforeseen intelligence requirements, than those for which
originally appropriated and in no case where
the item for which funds are requested has
been denied by the Congress: Provided further,
That
a
request
for
multiple
reprogrammings of funds using authority
provided in this section shall be made prior
to June 30, 2026.
SEC. 8090. Of the amounts appropriated in
this Act for ‘‘Shipbuilding and Conversion,
Navy’’, $290,000,000, to remain available for
obligation until September 30, 2030, may be
used for the purchase of two used sealift vessels for the National Defense Reserve Fleet,
established under section 11 of the Merchant
Ship Sales Act of 1946 (46 U.S.C. 57100): Provided, That such amounts are available for
reimbursements to the Ready Reserve Force,
Maritime Administration account of the
United States Department of Transportation
for programs, projects, activities, and expenses related to the National Defense Reserve Fleet: Provided further, That notwithstanding section 2218 of title 10, United
States Code, none of these funds shall be
transferred to the National Defense Sealift
Fund for execution.
SEC. 8091. The Secretary of Defense shall
post grant awards on a public website in a
searchable format.
SEC. 8092. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used by the National Security Agency to—
(1) conduct an acquisition pursuant to section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 for the purpose of targeting
a United States person; or
(2) acquire, monitor, or store the contents
(as such term is defined in section 2510(8) of
title 18, United States Code) of any electronic communication of a United States
person from a provider of electronic communication services to the public pursuant to
section 501 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978.
SEC. 8093. None of the funds made available
in this or any other Act may be used to pay
the salary of any officer or employee of any
agency funded by this Act who approves or
implements the transfer of administrative
responsibilities or budgetary resources of
any program, project, or activity financed by
this Act to the jurisdiction of another Federal agency not financed by this Act without
the express authorization of Congress: Provided, That this limitation shall not apply to
transfers of funds expressly provided for in
Department of Defense Appropriations Acts,
or provisions of Acts providing supplemental
appropriations for the Department of Defense.
SEC. 8094. Of the amounts appropriated in
this Act for ‘‘Operation and Maintenance,
Navy’’, $785,052,000, to remain available until
expended, may be used for any purposes related to the National Defense Reserve Fleet
established under section 11 of the Merchant
Ship Sales Act of 1946 (46 U.S.C. 57100): Provided, That such amounts are available for
reimbursements to the Ready Reserve Force,
Maritime Administration account of the
United States Department of Transportation
for programs, projects, activities, and expenses related to the National Defense Reserve Fleet.
SEC. 8095. (a) None of the funds provided in
this Act for the TAO Fleet Oiler program
shall be used to award a new contract that
provides for the acquisition of the following

PO 00000

Frm 00032

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

components unless those components are
manufactured in the United States: Auxiliary equipment (including pumps) for shipboard services; propulsion equipment (including engines, reduction gears, and propellers); shipboard cranes; spreaders for shipboard cranes; and anchor chains, specifically
for the seventh and subsequent ships of the
fleet.
(b) None of the funds provided in this Act
for any Frigate program shall be used to
award a new contract that provides for the
acquisition of the following components unless those components are manufactured in
the United States: Air circuit breakers; gyrocompasses; electronic navigation chart
systems; steering controls; pumps; propulsion and machinery control systems; totally
enclosed lifeboats; auxiliary equipment
pumps; shipboard cranes; auxiliary chill
water systems; and propulsion propellers:
Provided, That the Secretary of the Navy
shall incorporate United States manufactured propulsion engines and propulsion reduction gears into any Frigate program beginning not later than with the eleventh ship
of the program.
SEC. 8096. None of the funds provided in
this Act for requirements development, performance specification development, concept
design and development, ship configuration
development, systems engineering, naval architecture, marine engineering, operations
research analysis, industry studies, preliminary design, development of the Detailed Design and Construction Request for Proposals
solicitation package, or related activities for
the T–ARC(X) Cable Laying and Repair Ship
or the T–AGOS(X) Oceanographic Surveillance Ship may be used to award a new contract for such activities unless these contracts include specifications that all auxiliary equipment, including pumps and propulsion shafts, are manufactured in the United
States.
SEC. 8097. No amounts credited or otherwise made available in this or any other Act
to the Department of Defense Acquisition
Workforce Development Account may be
transferred to:
(1) the Rapid Prototyping Fund established
under section 804(d) of the National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (10
U.S.C. 2302 note); or
(2) credited to a military-department specific fund established under section 804(d)(2)
of the National Defense Authorization Act
for Fiscal Year 2016.
SEC. 8098. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used for Government
Travel Charge Card expenses by military or
civilian personnel of the Department of Defense for gaming, or for entertainment that
includes topless or nude entertainers or participants, as prohibited by Department of
Defense FMR, Volume 9, Chapter 3 and Department of Defense Instruction 1015.10 (enclosure 3, 14a and 14b).
SEC. 8099. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used to maintain or
establish a computer network unless such
network is designed to block access to pornography websites.
(b) Nothing in subsection (a) shall limit
the use of funds necessary for any Federal,
State, tribal, or local law enforcement agency or any other entity carrying out criminal
investigations, prosecution, or adjudication
activities, or for any activity necessary for
the national defense, including intelligence
activities.
SEC. 8100. None of the funds provided for, or
otherwise made available, in this or any
other Act, may be obligated or expended by
the Secretary of Defense to provide motorized vehicles, aviation platforms, munitions
other than small arms and munitions appropriate for customary ceremonial honors,

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

operational military units, or operational
military platforms if the Secretary determines that providing such units, platforms,
or equipment would undermine the readiness
of such units, platforms, or equipment.
SEC. 8101. (a) None of the funds made available by this or any other Act may be used to
enter into a contract, memorandum of understanding, or cooperative agreement with,
make a grant to, or provide a loan or loan
guarantee to any corporation that has any
unpaid Federal tax liability that has been assessed, for which all judicial and administrative remedies have been exhausted or have
lapsed, and that is not being paid in a timely
manner pursuant to an agreement with the
authority responsible for collecting such tax
liability, provided that the applicable Federal agency is aware of the unpaid Federal
tax liability.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply if the applicable Federal agency has considered suspension or debarment of the corporation described in such subsection and has made a
determination that such suspension or debarment is not necessary to protect the interests of the Federal Government.
SEC. 8102. (a) Amounts appropriated under
title IV of this Act, as detailed in budget activity eight in the tables titled Explanation
of Project Level Adjustments in the explanatory statement regarding this Act, may be
used for expenses for the agile research, development, test and evaluation, procurement, production, modification, and operation and maintenance, only for the following Software and Digital Technology
Pilot programs—
(1) Defensive CYBER—Software Prototype
Development (PE 0608041A);
(2) Risk Management Information (PE
0608013N);
(3) Maritime Tactical Command and Control (PE 0608231N);
(4) Space Domain Awareness/Planning/
Tasking SW (PE 1208248SF);
(5) Global Command and Control System
(PE 0303150K);
(6) Acquisition Visibility (PE 0608648D8Z);
(7) Enterprise Platforms and Capabilities—
Software Pilot Program (PE 0608140D8Z); and
(8) Accelerate the Procurement and Fielding of Innovative Technologies (APFIT) (PE
0000000D8Z).
(b) None of the funds appropriated by this
or prior Department of Defense Appropriations Acts may be obligated or expended to
initiate additional Software and Digital
Technology Pilot Programs in fiscal year
2026.
SEC. 8103. None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available by this Act may
be used to transfer the National Reconnaissance Office to the Space Force: Provided,
That nothing in this Act shall be construed
to limit or prohibit cooperation, collaboration, and coordination between the National
Reconnaissance Office and the Space Force
or any other elements of the Department of
Defense.
SEC. 8104. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used in contravention of
the following laws enacted or regulations
promulgated to implement the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment (done at New York on December
10, 1984):
(1) Section 2340A of title 18, United States
Code.
(2) Section 2242 of the Foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act of 1998 (division
G of Public Law 105–277; 112 Stat. 2681–822; 8
U.S.C. 1231 note) and regulations prescribed
thereto, including regulations under part 208
of title 8, Code of Federal Regulations, and
part 95 of title 22, Code of Federal Regulations.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1207

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(3) Sections 1002 and 1003 of the Department of Defense, Emergency Supplemental
Appropriations to Address Hurricanes in the
Gulf of Mexico, and Pandemic Influenza Act,
2006 (Public Law 109–148).
SEC. 8105. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to provide arms,
training, or other assistance to the Azov
Battalion.
SEC. 8106. The Secretary of Defense may, in
this fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter, accept and retain contributions, including money, personal property, and services, from foreign governments and other entities, to carry out assistance authorized by
section 1250 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (Public Law
114–92): Provided, That such contributions received shall be available to the Secretary of
Defense, with the concurrence of the Secretary of State, to provide assistance authorized by such section, for replacement of any
weapons or articles provided to entities described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of subsection (a)(1) of such section from the inventory of the United States, and to recover or
dispose of equipment previously provided to
such entities: Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense shall consult with the congressional defense committees in advance of
the provision of support provided to forces or
groups described in subparagraph (B) of such
subsection: Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense shall notify the congressional defense committees in writing upon
the receipt and upon the obligation of any
contribution, delineating the sources and
amounts of the funds received and the specific use of such contributions: Provided further, That any notification of obligation of
funds received in this section shall specify an
estimated timeline for the delivery of defense articles and defense services provided
and shall identify if any equipment provided
requires enhanced end-use monitoring: Provided further, That contributions of money
for the purposes provided herein from any
foreign government or other entity may be
credited to the Operation and Maintenance,
Defense-Wide account, to remain available
for the following two fiscal years, and used
for such purposes: Provided further, That the
Secretary of Defense shall provide quarterly
reports to the congressional defense committees on the use and status of funds received
pursuant to this section.
SEC. 8107. During the current fiscal year,
the Department of Defense is authorized to
incur obligations of not to exceed $350,000,000
for purposes specified in section 2350j(c) of
title 10, United States Code, in anticipation
of receipt of contributions, only from the
Government of Kuwait, under that section:
Provided, That, such contributions shall,
upon receipt, be credited to the appropriations or fund which incurred such obligations.
SEC. 8108. Of the amounts appropriated in
this Act under the heading ‘‘Operation and
Maintenance, Defense-Wide’’, for the Defense
Security Cooperation Agency, $1,499,808,000,
to remain available until September 30, 2027,
shall be available for International Security
Cooperation Programs and other programs
to provide support and assistance to foreign
security forces or other groups or individuals
to conduct, support or facilitate counterterrorism, crisis response, or building partner
capacity programs: Provided, That the Secretary of Defense shall, not less than 15 days
prior to obligating funds made available in
this section, notify the congressional defense
committees in writing of the details of any
planned obligation: Provided further, That
the Secretary of Defense shall provide quarterly reports to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate on the use and status of funds
made available in this section.

PO 00000

Frm 00033

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SEC. 8109. Of the amounts appropriated in
this Act under the heading ‘‘Operation and
Maintenance, Defense-Wide’’, for the Defense
Security Cooperation Agency, $267,298,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2027,
shall be available for support authorized by
subparagraphs (A) through (E) and (G)
through (I) of section 1226(a)(1) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
Year 2016 (22 U.S.C. 2151 note), of which not
less than $150,000,000 shall be for Jordan: Provided, That the Secretary of Defense shall,
not less than 15 days prior to obligating
funds made available under this section, notify the congressional defense committees in
writing of the details of any planned obligation and the nature of the expenses incurred:
Provided further, That the Secretary of Defense shall provide quarterly reports to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate on the use
and status of funds made available in this
section.
SEC. 8110. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used in contravention of
the War Powers Resolution (50 U.S.C. 1541 et
seq.).
SEC. 8111. None of the funds made available
by this Act for excess defense articles, assistance under section 333 of title 10, United
States Code, or peacekeeping operations for
the countries designated annually to be in
violation of the standards of the Child Soldiers Prevention Act of 2008 (Public Law 110–
457; 22 U.S.C. 2370c–1) may be used to support
any military training or operation that includes child soldiers, as defined by the Child
Soldiers Prevention Act of 2008, unless such
assistance is otherwise permitted under section 404 of the Child Soldiers Prevention Act
of 2008.
SEC. 8112. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be made available for any
member of the Taliban.
SEC. 8113. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any transfer of funds, appropriated or otherwise made available by this
Act, for support to friendly foreign countries
in connection with the conduct of operations
in which the United States is not participating, pursuant to section 331(d) of title 10,
United States Code, shall be made in accordance with section 8005 of this Act.
SEC. 8114. (a) None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this
or any other Act may be used by the Secretary of Defense, or any other official or officer of the Department of Defense, to enter
into a contract, memorandum of understanding, or cooperative agreement with, or
make a grant to, or provide a loan or loan
guarantee to Rosoboronexport or any subsidiary of Rosoboronexport.
(b) The Secretary of Defense may waive
the limitation in subsection (a) if the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of
State and the Director of National Intelligence, determines that it is in the vital national security interest of the United States
to do so, and certifies in writing to the congressional defense committees that—
(1) Rosoboronexport has ceased the transfer of lethal military equipment to, and the
maintenance of existing lethal military
equipment for, the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic;
(2) the armed forces of the Russian Federation have withdrawn from Ukraine; and
(3) agents of the Russian Federation have
ceased taking active measures to destabilize
the control of the Government of Ukraine
over eastern Ukraine.
(c) The Inspector General of the Department of Defense shall conduct a review of
any action involving Rosoboronexport with
respect to a waiver issued by the Secretary
of Defense pursuant to subsection (b), and
not later than 90 days after the date on

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1208

which such a waiver is issued by the Secretary of Defense, the Inspector General
shall submit to the congressional defense
committees a report containing the results
of the review conducted with respect to such
waiver.
SEC. 8115. The Secretary of Defense shall
notify the congressional defense committees
in writing not more than 30 days after the receipt of any contribution of funds received
from the government of a foreign country for
any purpose relating to the stationing or operations of the United States Armed Forces:
Provided, That such notification shall include the amount of the contribution; the
purpose for which such contribution was
made; and the authority under which such
contribution was accepted by the Secretary
of Defense: Provided further, That not fewer
than 15 days prior to obligating such funds,
the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the
congressional defense committees in writing
a notification of the planned use of such contributions, including whether such contributions would support existing or new stationing or operations of the United States
Armed Forces.
SEC. 8116. (a) The Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs, in coordination with the Secretaries
of the military departments and the Chiefs
of the Armed Forces, shall submit to the
congressional defense committees, not later
than 30 days after the last day of each quarter of the fiscal year, a report on the use of
operation and maintenance funds for activities or exercises in excess of $5,000,000 that
have been designated by the Secretary of Defense as unplanned activities for fiscal year
2026.
(b) Each report required by subsection (a)
shall also include—
(1) the title, date, and location, of each activity and exercise covered by the report;
(2) an identification of the military department and units that participated in each
such activity or exercise (including an estimate of the number of participants);
(3) the total cost of the activity or exercise, by budget line item (with a breakdown
by cost element such as transportation); and
(4) a short explanation of the objective of
the activity or exercise.
(c) The report required by subsection (a)
shall be submitted in unclassified form, but
may include a classified annex.
SEC. 8117. (a) Within 45 days of enactment
of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall allocate amounts made available from the Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors (CHIPS) for America Defense
Fund for fiscal year 2026 pursuant to the
transfer authority in section 102(b)(1) of the
CHIPS Act of 2022 (division A of Public Law
117–167), to the account specified, in the
amounts specified, and for the projects and
activities specified, in the table titled ‘‘Department of Defense Allocation of Funds:
CHIPS and Science Act Fiscal Year 2026’’ in
the report accompanying this Act.
(b) Neither the President nor his designee
may allocate any amounts that are made
available for any fiscal year under section
102(b)(2) of the CHIPS Act of 2022 if there is
in effect an Act making or continuing appropriations for part of a fiscal year for the Department of Defense: Provided, That in any
fiscal year, the matter preceding this proviso
shall not apply to the allocation, apportionment, or allotment of amounts for continuing administration of programs allocated using funds transferred from the
CHIPS for America Defense Fund, which
may be allocated pursuant to the transfer
authority in section 102(b)(1) of the CHIPS
Act of 2022 only in amounts that are no more
than the allocation for such purposes in subsection (a) of this section.
(c) The Secretary of Defense may reallocate funds allocated by subsection (a) of this

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

section, subject to the terms and conditions
contained in the provisos in section 8005 of
this Act: Provided, That amounts may be reallocated pursuant to this subsection only
for those requirements necessary to carry
out section 9903(b) of the William M. (Mac)
Thornberry National Defense Authorization
Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116–283).
(d) Concurrent with the annual budget submission of the President for fiscal year 2027,
the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate proposed
allocations by account and by program,
project, or activity, with detailed justifications, for amounts made available under section 102(b)(2) of the CHIPS Act of 2022 for fiscal year 2027.
(e) The Department of Defense shall provide the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and Senate
quarterly reports on the status of balances of
projects and activities funded by the CHIPS
for America Defense Fund for amounts allocated pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, including all uncommitted, committed,
and unobligated funds.
SEC. 8118. Not later than 15 days after the
date on which any foreign base that involves
the stationing or operations of the United
States Armed Forces, including a temporary
base, permanent base, or base owned and operated by a foreign country, is opened or
closed, the Secretary of Defense shall notify
the congressional defense committees in
writing of the opening or closing of such
base: Provided, That such notification shall
also include information on any personnel
changes, costs, and savings associated with
the opening or closing of such base.
SEC. 8119. None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available by this or any
other Act shall be obligated or expended by
the United States Government for any of the
following purposes:
(1) To establish any military installation
or base for the purpose of providing for the
permanent stationing of United States
Armed Forces in Iraq.
(2) To exercise United States control over
any oil resource of Iraq or Syria.
SEC. 8120. Up to $500,000,000 of the funds appropriated by this Act under the heading
‘‘Operation and Maintenance, Defense-Wide’’
for the Defense Security Cooperation Agency
may be used to support the armed forces of
Jordan.
SEC. 8121. The amounts appropriated in
title II of this Act are hereby reduced by
$1,050,000,000 to reflect excess cash balances
in Department of Defense Working Capital
Funds, as follows:
(1) From ‘‘Operation and Maintenance,
Army’’, $100,000,000;
(2) From ‘‘Operation and Maintenance,
Navy’’, $450,000,000; and
(3) From ‘‘Operation and Maintenance, Air
Force’’, $500,000,000.
SEC. 8122. Of the funds appropriated in this
Act under the heading ‘‘Operation and Maintenance, Defense-Wide’’, $47,000,000 shall be
for continued implementation and expansion
of the Sexual Assault Special Victims’ Counsel Program: Provided, That the funds are
made available for transfer to the Department of the Army, the Department of the
Navy, and the Department of the Air Force:
Provided further, That funds transferred shall
be merged with and available for the same
purposes and for the same time period as the
appropriations to which the funds are transferred: Provided further, That this transfer
authority is in addition to any other transfer
authority provided in this Act.
SEC. 8123. In carrying out the program described in the memorandum on the subject of
‘‘Policy for Assisted Reproductive Services
for the Benefit of Seriously or Severely Ill/

PO 00000

Frm 00034

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Injured (Category II or III) Active Duty
Service Members’’ issued by the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs on
April 3, 2012, and the guidance issued to implement such memorandum, the Secretary of
Defense shall apply such policy and guidance, except that—
(1) the limitation on periods regarding embryo cryopreservation and storage set forth
in part III(G) and in part IV(H) of such
memorandum shall not apply; and
(2) the term ‘‘assisted reproductive technology’’
shall
include
embryo
cryopreservation and storage without limitation
on
the
duration
of
such
cryopreservation and storage.
SEC. 8124. The Secretary of Defense may
obligate funds made available by this Act for
procurement or for research, development,
test and evaluation for the F–35 Joint Strike
Fighter to modify not fewer than nine F–35
aircraft, including at least three F–35 aircraft of each variant, for any test configuration: Provided, That the Secretary of Defense
shall, with the concurrence of the Secretary
of the Air Force and the Secretary of the
Navy, notify the congressional defense committees not fewer than 30 days prior to obligating funds under this section: Provided further, That any transfer of funds pursuant to
the authority provided in this section shall
be made in accordance with section 8005 of
this Act.
SEC. 8125. None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available by this or any
other Act may be obligated to integrate an
alternative engine on any F–35 aircraft.
SEC. 8126. The Secretary of Defense may
use up to $650,000,000 of the amounts appropriated or otherwise made available in this
Act to the Department of Defense for the
rapid acquisition and deployment of supplies
and associated support services pursuant to
section 3601 of title 10, United States Code,
but only for the purposes specified in clauses
(i), (ii), (iii), and (iv) of subsection (c)(3)(B) of
such section and subject to the applicable
limits specified in clauses (i), (ii), and (iii) of
such subsection and, in the case of clause (iv)
of such subsection, subject to a limit of
$50,000,000, or for the purposes specified in
section 229 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2024 (Public Law
118–31) and subject to a limit of $100,000,000:
Provided, That the Secretary of Defense shall
notify the congressional defense committees
promptly of all uses of this authority.
SEC. 8127. Notwithstanding section 8056 of
this Act, amounts appropriated under the
heading ‘‘Research, Development, Test and
Evaluation, Defense-Wide’’ of this Act, as detailed in budget activity eight in the tables
titled Explanation of Project Level Adjustments in the explanatory statement accompanying this Act for ‘‘Defense Innovation
Unit (DIU) Fielding’’ line 301, may be used
for expenses for agile research, development,
test and evaluation, procurement, production, modification, and operation and maintenance requirements, including the initial
acquisition of end-items for operational use:
Provided, That none of these funds may be
obligated or expended until 15 days after the
Secretary of Defense provides the congressional defense committees a detailed execution plan for such funds.
SEC. 8128. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to support any activity conducted by, or associated with, the
Wuhan Institute of Virology.
SEC. 8129. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to fund any work to
be performed by EcoHealth Alliance, Inc. in
China on research supported by the government of China unless the Secretary of Defense determines that a waiver to such prohibition is in the national security interests of
the United States and, not later than 14 days

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

after granting such a waiver, submits to the
congressional defense committees a detailed
justification for the waiver, including—
(1) an identification of the Department of
Defense entity obligating or expending the
funds;
(2) an identification of the amount of such
funds;
(3) an identification of the intended purpose of such funds;
(4) an identification of the recipient or prospective recipient of such funds (including
any third-party entity recipient, as applicable);
(5) an explanation for how the waiver is in
the national security interests of the United
States; and
(6) any other information the Secretary determines appropriate.
SEC. 8130. None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available in this or any
other Act may be used to transfer, release,
or assist in the transfer or release to or within the United States, its territories, or possessions Khalid Sheikh Mohammed or any
other detainee who—
(1) is not a United States citizen or a member of the Armed Forces of the United
States; and
(2) is or was held on or after June 24, 2009,
at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, by the Department of Defense.
SEC. 8131. None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available in this Act may
be used to transfer any individual detained
at United States Naval Station Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, to the custody or control of the
individual’s country of origin, any other foreign country, or any other foreign entity except in accordance with section 1034 of the
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (Public Law 114–92) and section
1035 of the John S. McCain National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115–232).
SEC. 8132. (a) None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available in this
or any other Act may be used to construct,
acquire, or modify any facility in the United
States, its territories, or possessions to
house any individual described in subsection
(c) for the purposes of detention or imprisonment in the custody or under the effective
control of the Department of Defense.
(b) The prohibition in subsection (a) shall
not apply to any modification of facilities at
United States Naval Station, Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba.
(c) An individual described in this subsection is any individual who, as of June 24,
2009, is located at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and who—
(1) is not a citizen of the United States or
a member of the Armed Forces of the United
States; and
(2) is—
(A) in the custody or under the effective
control of the Department of Defense; or
(B) otherwise under detention at United
States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba.
SEC. 8133. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to carry out the closure or realignment of the United States
Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
SEC. 8134. There is appropriated to the ‘‘Department of Defense Credit Program Account’’ established pursuant to section
149(e)(5) of title 10, United States Code,
$97,770,000, to remain available until expended, to carry out a pilot program on capital assistance to support defense investment
in the industrial base as authorized by section 149(e) of such title, of which up to
$2,500,000 may be used for administrative expenses and project-specific transaction costs:
Provided, That costs of loans and loan guarantees, including the cost of modifying such

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1209

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

loans and loan guarantees, shall be as defined in section 502 of the Congressional
Budget Act of 1974: Provided further, That
such amounts are available to subsidize
gross obligations for the principal amount of
loans, and total loan principal, any part of
which is to be guaranteed, not to exceed
$4,390,000,000: Provided further, That, for the
purposes of carrying out the Congressional
Budget Act of 1974, the Director of the Congressional Budget Office may request, and
the Secretary shall promptly provide documentation and information relating to a
project receiving capital assistance as authorized under section 149(e) of such title.
SEC. 8135. None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available by this Act may
be used to divest or prepare to divest more
than eight U–2 aircraft.
SEC. 8136. The amounts appropriated in
title II of this Act are hereby reduced by
$1,204,617,000 to reflect savings attributable
to efficiencies, streamlining of functions,
and management improvements in the Department of Defense, as follows:
(1) From ‘‘Operation and Maintenance,
Army’’, $563,288,000;
(2) From ‘‘Operation and Maintenance,
Navy’’, $109,159,000;
(3) From ‘‘Operation and Maintenance, Marine Corps’’, $9,467,000;
(4) From ‘‘Operation and Maintenance, Air
Force’’, $319,765,000;
(5) From ‘‘Operation and Maintenance,
Space Force’’, $6,493,000; and
(6) From ‘‘Operation and Maintenance, Defense-Wide’’, $196,445,000:
Provided, That such reduction may not be derived from amounts appropriated by this Act
for the National Intelligence Program or the
Military Intelligence Program.
SEC. 8137. (a) Concurrent with the annual
budget submission of the President for fiscal
year 2027, and each fiscal year thereafter,
pursuant to section 1105(a) of title 31, United
States Code, the Secretary of Defense shall
submit to the Committees on Appropriations
of the House of Representatives and the Senate the following with respect to amounts
made available by Public Law 119–21 until all
such amounts have been expended:
(1) proposed allocations by account, by fiscal year, and by program, project, or activity, with detailed justifications;
(2) P–1 and R–1 budget justification documents, which shall identify the allocation of
funds by program, project, and activity; and
(3) budget justification documents, to be
known as M–1 and O–1, which shall identify
the allocation of funds by budget activity,
activity group, and sub-activity group.
(b) Subsequent to the submission required
in subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense
shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and Senate quarterly reports on the status of
balances of projects and activities funded
using amounts described in subsection (a),
including all uncommitted, committed, and
unobligated funds, until all such amounts
have been expended.
SEC. 8138. The Secretary of Defense shall
obligate funds made available by this or any
other Act, including prior year Acts, under
the heading ‘‘Research, Development, Test
and Evaluation, Navy’’ for the Next Generation Fighter program for the purpose of executing the engineering and manufacturing
development contract for the Next Generation Fighter aircraft in a manner that
achieves accelerated Initial Operational Capability: Provided, That none of the funds
made available to the Department of Defense
for this fiscal year or any prior fiscal year
may be used to pause, cancel, or terminate
the Next Generation Fighter program.
SEC. 8139. Of the funds provided under the
heading
‘‘Operation
and
Maintenance,

PO 00000

Frm 00035

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Navy’’, not less than $80,000,000 shall be made
available for the establishment of a Platform
Supply Vessel Pilot Program (in this section
referred to as the ‘‘Program’’) for the purpose of validating Service requirements necessary to meet at-sea and in-shore logistics
operations: Provided, That the Program shall
evaluate options to time charter no less than
six, and enter into a contractual agreement
for no less than two time charters: Provided
further, That the condition of the time charter should consider existing United Statesbuilt platform supply vessels that are documented under the laws of the United States,
owned by a citizen of the United States
under 46 U.S.C. 50501, configured for logistics
support in the Indo-Pacific region that can
meet the regulatory and physical requirements to transport nearly 500,000 gallons of
various standard fuels, and provide up to
10,000 square feet of combined deck space for
transport of military equipment and personnel for delivery in and out of shallow
draft ports in the Indo-Pacific region: Provided further, That the Secretary of the Navy
shall provide a briefing within 180 days after
the enactment of this Act to the House and
Senate Appropriations Committees on the
status of the Program and the effectiveness
of using PSVs to fill this critical need.
SEC. 8140. Funds made available for the
UH–60 Blackhawk aircraft program under
this or any other Act, including prior year
Acts, under the headings ‘‘Aircraft Procurement, Army’’ and ‘‘Research, Development,
Test and Evaluation, Army’’ shall be obligated only for the purposes for which such
funds were appropriated and such funds may
not be reprogrammed or transferred for
other purposes: Provided, That none of the
funds made available to the Department of
Defense for this fiscal year or any prior fiscal year may be used to pause, cancel, or terminate the UH–60 Blackhawk aircraft program or to prepare to pause, cancel, or terminate such program.
SEC. 8141. Funds made available for the E–
7 Wedgetail aircraft program under this or
any other Act, including prior year Acts,
under the headings ‘‘Aircraft Procurement,
Air Force’’ and ‘‘Research, Development,
Test and Evaluation, Air Force’’ shall be obligated only for the purposes for which such
funds were appropriated and such funds may
not be reprogrammed or transferred for
other purposes: Provided, That none of the
funds made available to the Department of
Defense for this fiscal year or any prior fiscal year may be used to pause, cancel, or terminate the E–7 Wedgetail aircraft program
or to prepare to pause, cancel, or terminate
such program.
SEC. 8142. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to close—
(1) the Rock Island Arsenal Museum located in Rock Island Arsenal, Illinois;
(2) the Fort Sill National Historic Landmark and Museum located in Lawton, Oklahoma;
(3) the United States Army Transportation
Museum located at Fort Eustis, Virginia; or
(4) the General George Patton Museum of
Leadership located at Fort Knox, Kentucky.
SEC. 8143. Of the amounts appropriated in
this Act under the heading ‘‘Operation and
Maintenance, Defense-Wide’’, for the Defense
Security Cooperation Agency, $1,000,000,000,
to remain available until September 30, 2027,
shall be for the Taiwan Security Cooperation
Initiative: Provided, That such funds shall be
available to the Secretary of Defense, with
the concurrence of the Secretary of State, to
provide assistance, including new procurement of defense articles, services, and military education and training to Taiwan: Provided further, That equipment procured using
funds made available in this section, and not
yet transferred to Taiwan, or returned by

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1210

Taiwan to the United States, may be treated
as stocks of the Department of Defense upon
written notification to the congressional defense committees: Provided further, That the
Secretary of Defense shall, not less than 15
days prior to obligating funds made available in this section, notify the congressional
defense committees in writing of the details
of any such obligation: Provided further, That
the Secretary of Defense shall provide quarterly reports to the congressional defense
committees on the use and status of funds
made available in this section.
SEC. 8144. Of the amounts appropriated or
otherwise made available by title II of this
Act under the heading ‘‘Operation and Maintenance, Air Force’’, the Secretary of Defense may reimburse the Federated States of
Micronesia in an amount not to exceed
$34,000,000 for land acquisition costs for defense sites in Yap.
SEC. 8145. The total amount appropriated
in title II of this Act is hereby reduced by
$550,000,000 to reflect savings due to favorable bulk fuel rates: Provided, That such reduction may not be derived from amounts
appropriated by this Act for the National Intelligence Program or the Military Intelligence Program.
SEC. 8146. In making Federal financial assistance, the Department of Defense shall
continue to apply the negotiated indirect
cost rates in section 200.414 of title 2, Code of
Federal Regulations, including with respect
to the approval of deviations from negotiated indirect cost rates, to the same extent
and in the same manner as such negotiated
indirect cost rates were applied in fiscal year
2024: Provided, That none of the funds appropriated in this or prior Department of Defense Appropriations Acts, or otherwise
made available to the Department of Defense
may be used to develop, modify, or implement changes to such fiscal year 2024 negotiated indirect cost rates.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8147. Of the amounts appropriated in
this Act under the heading ‘‘Operation and
Maintenance, Defense-Wide’’, $150,000,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2027,
may be used for replacement of defense articles and for reimbursement of defense services provided to or identified for provision to
Taiwan: Provided, That such funds may be
transferred to appropriations made available
under titles II, III, IV, and V of this Act for
replacement, through new procurement or
repair of existing unserviceable equipment,
of defense articles from the stocks of the Department of Defense, and for reimbursement
for defense services of the Department of Defense and military education and training,
provided to the government of Taiwan or to
foreign countries that have provided support
to Taiwan at the request of the United
States: Provided further, That funds transferred pursuant to this section shall be
merged with and available for the same purposes and for the same time period as the appropriations to which the funds are transferred: Provided further, That the Secretary
of Defense shall notify the congressional defense committees of the details of such
transfers not less than 15 days before any
such transfer: Provided further, That upon a
determination that all or part of the funds
transferred from this appropriation are not
necessary for the purposes provided herein,
such amounts may be transferred back and
merged with this appropriation: Provided further, That the transfer authority provided in
this section is in addition to any other transfer authority provided in this Act.
SEC. 8148. None of the funds made available
to the Department of Defense for this fiscal
year or any prior fiscal year may be used by
the Department of Defense to award a sole-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

source or non-competitive contract in excess
of $100,000,000 for space-based airborne moving target indication systems.
SEC. 8149. None of the funds made available
to the Department of Defense for this fiscal
year or any prior fiscal year may be used to
pause, cancel, or terminate the Next-Generation Overhead Persistent Infrared Geosynchronous Earth Orbit and the Next-Generation Overhead Persistent Infrared Polar
programs.
SEC. 8150. Any transactions or follow-on
transactions entered into pursuant to the
authority in section 2808a of title 10, United
States Code, to carry out repair and construction projects for facilities may only be
carried out if, without regard to section
2808a, such projects are otherwise authorized
by law and the use of military construction,
operation and maintenance, or research, development, test and evaluation funds is otherwise authorized for such projects: Provided,
That none of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this or prior Acts,
by title I of division D of Public Law 119–37
or by any prior Act making appropriations
for Military Construction, Veterans Affairs,
and Related Agencies, or by funds made
available to the Department of Defense in
Public Law 119–21 may be transferred pursuant to the authority in section 2808a of title
10, United States Code.
SEC. 8151. The amounts appropriated in
title IV of this Act are hereby reduced by
$1,000,000,000 due to the expiration of authorizations contained in 15 U.S.C. 638, as follows:
‘‘Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Army’’, $140,000,000;
‘‘Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Navy’’, $157,000,000;
‘‘Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Air Force’’, $325,000,000;
‘‘Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Space Force’’, $140,000,000; and
‘‘Research, Development, Test and Evaluation, Defense-Wide’’, $238,000,000:
Provided, That this section shall not apply to
appropriations for the National Intelligence
Program: Provided further, That if a law reauthorizing 15 U.S.C. 638 for fiscal year 2026
is enacted after the date of the enactment of
this section and before September 30, 2026,
the required expenditure amount in 15 U.S.C.
638 for the Department of Defense for such
program for such fiscal year shall be prorated on an annual basis for the remainder of
such fiscal year based on the extramural
budget (as defined in 15 U.S.C. 638(e)(1)) of
the Department on the date of the enactment of such law.
SEC. 8152. Of the amounts appropriated in
this Act under the heading ‘‘Operation and
Maintenance, Defense-Wide’’, for the Defense
Security Cooperation Agency, $200,000,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2027,
shall be available for the International Security Cooperation Program – Baltic Security
Initiative to provide support and assistance
to the foreign security forces of Estonia,
Latvia, and Lithuania in accordance with
the objectives identified by section 1247 of
the National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2026 (Public Law 119–60): Provided, That the Secretary of Defense shall,
not less than 15 days prior to obligating
funds made available in this section, notify
the congressional defense committees in
writing of the details of any planned obligation: Provided further, That the Secretary of
Defense shall provide quarterly reports to
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate on
the use and status of funds made available in
this section.
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 8153. (a) In addition to amounts made
available elsewhere in this Act, $500,000,000,

PO 00000

Frm 00036

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

of which not less than $150,000,000 shall be
available only for the qualification and testing of second source providers, is hereby appropriated to the Department of Defense and
may be transferred to the procurement accounts of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and
Department of Defense and the ‘‘Research,
Development, Test and Evaluation, DefenseWide’’ account, only for the following purposes—
(1) investment in modernization, expansion, or facilitization of the solid rocket
motor industrial base, including capital
equipment, tooling, and facility upgrades;
(2) workforce development, training, and
retention;
(3) supplier base expansion and qualification, including second- and third-tier vendors and non-traditional manufacturers;
(4) process improvements, automation, and
digital manufacturing; and
(5) risk reduction and surge capacity initiatives necessary to ensure reliable, affordable, and timely production of solid rocket
motors and related energetics:
(b) Not later than 60 days after the date of
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of
Defense shall provide a briefing to the congressional defense committees on planned
activities under this section, including an
explanation of how competition considerations and industry input were incorporated
into acquisition and execution decisions:
Provided, That none of the funds provided
under this section may be obligated or expended until 30 days after the Secretary of
Defense provides to the congressional defense committees a detailed execution plan
for the use of such funds: Provided further,
That the Secretary of Defense shall, not
fewer than 15 days prior to any transfer of
funds, notify the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate in writing of the details of any
such transfer: Provided further, That upon
transfer, the funds shall be merged with and
available for the same purposes, and for the
same time period, as the appropriation to
which transferred: Provided further, That
upon a determination that all or part of the
funds transferred from this appropriation are
not necessary for the purposes provided herein, such amounts may be transferred back
and merged with this appropriation: Provided
further, That the transfer authority provided
under this section is in addition to any other
transfer authority provided elsewhere in this
Act.
This division may be cited as the ‘‘Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
DIVISION B—DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR,
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND
EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
TITLE I
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING ADMINISTRATION
TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT SERVICES

For necessary expenses of the Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act (referred to
in this Act as ‘‘WIOA’’) and the National Apprenticeship Act, $3,981,588,000 plus reimbursements, shall be available. Of the
amounts provided:
(1) for grants to States for adult employment and training activities, youth activities, and dislocated worker employment and
training activities, $2,919,332,000 as follows:
(A) $875,649,000 for adult employment and
training activities, of which $163,649,000 shall
be available for the period July 1, 2026
through June 30, 2027, and of which
$712,000,000 shall be available for the period
October 1, 2026 through June 30, 2027;
(B) $948,130,000 for youth activities, which
shall be available for the period April 1, 2026
through June 30, 2027; and

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

(C) $1,095,553,000 for dislocated worker employment and training activities, of which
$235,553,000 shall be available for the period
July 1, 2026 through June 30, 2027, and of
which $860,000,000 shall be available for the
period October 1, 2026 through June 30, 2027:
Provided, That the funds available for allotment to outlying areas to carry out subtitle
B of title I of the WIOA shall not be subject
to the requirements of section 127(b)(1)(B)(ii)
of such Act: Provided further, That notwithstanding the requirements of WIOA, outlying
areas may submit a single application for a
consolidated grant that awards funds that
would otherwise be available to such areas to
carry out the activities described in subtitle
B of title I of the WIOA: Provided further,
That such application shall be submitted to
the Secretary of Labor (referred to in this
title as ‘‘Secretary’’), at such time, in such
manner, and containing such information as
the Secretary may require: Provided further,
That outlying areas awarded a consolidated
grant described in the preceding provisos
may use the funds for any of the programs
and activities authorized under such subtitle
B of title I of the WIOA subject to approval
of the application and such reporting requirements issued by the Secretary; and
(2) for national programs, $1,062,256,000 as
follows:
(A) $300,859,000 for the dislocated workers
assistance national reserve, of which
$100,859,000 shall be available for the period
July 1, 2026 through September 30, 2027, and
of which $200,000,000 shall be available for the
period October 1, 2026 through September 30,
2027: Provided, That funds provided to carry
out section 132(a)(2)(A) of the WIOA may be
used to provide assistance to a State for
statewide or local use in order to address
cases where there have been worker dislocations across multiple sectors or across multiple local areas and such workers remain
dislocated; coordinate the State workforce
development plan with emerging economic
development needs; and train such eligible
dislocated workers: Provided further, That
funds provided to carry out sections 168(b)
and 169(c) of the WIOA may be used for technical assistance and demonstration projects,
respectively, that provide assistance to new
entrants in the workforce and incumbent
workers: Provided further, That notwithstanding section 168(b) of the WIOA, of the
funds provided under this subparagraph, the
Secretary may reserve not more than 10 percent of such funds to provide technical assistance and carry out additional activities
related to the transition to the WIOA: Provided further, That of the funds provided
under this subparagraph, $120,000,000 shall be
for training and employment assistance
under sections 168(b), 169(c) (notwithstanding
the 10 percent limitation in such section)
and 170 of the WIOA as follows:
(i) $55,000,000 shall be for workers in the
Appalachian region, as defined by 40 U.S.C.
14102(a)(1), workers in the Lower Mississippi,
as defined in section 4(2) of the Delta Development Act (Public Law 100–460, 102 Stat.
2246; 7 U.S.C. 2009aa(2)), and workers in the
region served by the Northern Border Regional Commission, as defined by 40 U.S.C.
15733; and
(ii) $65,000,000 shall be for the purpose of
developing, offering, or improving educational or career training programs at community colleges, defined as public institutions of higher education, as described in
section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of
1965 and at which the associate’s degree is
primarily the highest degree awarded, with
other eligible institutions of higher education, as defined in section 101(a) of the
Higher Education Act of 1965, eligible to participate through consortia, with community
colleges as the lead grantee: Provided, That

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1211

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

the Secretary shall follow the requirements
for the program in House Report 116–62: Provided further, That any grant funds used for
apprenticeships shall be used to support only
apprenticeship programs registered under
the National Apprenticeship Act and as referred to in section 3(7)(B) of the WIOA;
(B) $62,500,000 for Native American programs under section 166 of the WIOA, which
shall be available for the period July 1, 2026
through June 30, 2027;
(C) $97,396,000 for migrant and seasonal
farmworker programs under section 167 of
the WIOA, including $90,134,000 for formula
grants (of which not less than 70 percent
shall be for employment and training services), $6,591,000 for migrant and seasonal
housing (of which not less than 70 percent
shall be for permanent housing), and $671,000
for other discretionary purposes, which shall
be available for the period April 1, 2026
through June 30, 2027: Provided, That notwithstanding any other provision of law or
related regulation, the Department of Labor
shall take no action limiting the number or
proportion of eligible participants receiving
related assistance services or discouraging
grantees from providing such services: Provided further, That notwithstanding the definition of ‘‘eligible seasonal farmworker’’ in
section 167(i)(3)(A) of the WIOA relating to
an individual being ‘‘low-income’’, an individual is eligible for migrant and seasonal
farmworker programs under section 167 of
the WIOA under that definition if, in addition to meeting the requirements of clauses
(i) and (ii) of section 167(i)(3)(A), such individual is a member of a family with a total
family income equal to or less than 150 percent of the poverty line;
(D) $105,000,000 for YouthBuild activities as
described in section 171 of the WIOA, which
shall be available for the period April 1, 2026
through June 30, 2027;
(E) $110,000,000 for ex-offender activities,
under the authority of section 169 of the
WIOA, which shall be available for the period
April 1, 2026 through June 30, 2027: Provided,
That of this amount, $30,000,000 shall be for
competitive grants to national and regional
intermediaries for activities that prepare for
employment young adults with criminal
legal histories, young adults who have been
justice system-involved, or young adults who
have dropped out of school or other educational programs, with a priority for
projects serving high-crime, high-poverty
areas;
(F) $6,000,000 for the Workforce Data Quality Initiative, under the authority of section
169 of the WIOA, which shall be available for
the period July 1, 2026 through June 30, 2027;
(G) $285,000,000 to expand opportunities
through apprenticeships only registered
under the National Apprenticeship Act and
as referred to in section 3(7)(B) of the WIOA,
to be available to the Secretary to carry out
activities through grants, cooperative agreements, contracts and other arrangements,
with States and other appropriate entities,
including equity intermediaries and business
and labor industry partner intermediaries,
which shall be available for the period July
1, 2026 through June 30, 2027; and
(H) $95,501,000 for carrying out Demonstration and Pilot projects under section 169(c) of
the WIOA, which shall be available for the
period April 1, 2026 through June 30, 2027, in
addition to funds available for such activities under subparagraph (A) for the projects,
and in the amounts, specified in the table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act): Provided, That such funds
may be used for projects that are related to
the employment and training needs of dis-

PO 00000

Frm 00037

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

located workers, other adults, or youth: Provided further, That the 10 percent funding
limitation under such section of the WIOA
shall not apply to such funds: Provided further, That section 169(b)(6)(C) of the WIOA
shall not apply to such funds: Provided further, That sections 102 and 107 of this Act
shall not apply to such funds.
JOB CORPS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

To carry out subtitle C of title I of the
WIOA, including Federal administrative expenses, the purchase and hire of passenger
motor vehicles, the construction, alteration,
and repairs of buildings and other facilities,
and the purchase of real property for training centers as authorized by the WIOA,
$1,760,155,000, plus reimbursements, as follows:
(1) $1,603,325,000 for Job Corps Operations,
which shall be available for the period July
1, 2026 through June 30, 2027;
(2) $123,000,000 for construction, rehabilitation and acquisition of Job Corps Centers,
which shall be available for the period July
1, 2026 through June 30, 2029, and which may
include the acquisition, maintenance, and
repair of major items of equipment: Provided,
That the Secretary may transfer up to 15
percent of such funds to meet the operational needs of such centers or to achieve
administrative efficiencies: Provided further,
That any funds transferred pursuant to the
preceding proviso shall not be available for
obligation after June 30, 2027: Provided further, That the Committees on Appropriations
of the House of Representatives and the Senate are notified at least 15 days in advance of
any transfer; and
(3) $33,830,000 for necessary expenses of Job
Corps, which shall be available for obligation
for the period October 1, 2025 through September 30, 2026:
Provided, That no funds from any other appropriation shall be used to provide meal
services at or for Job Corps Centers.
COMMUNITY SERVICE EMPLOYMENT FOR OLDER
AMERICANS

To carry out title V of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (referred to in this Act as
‘‘OAA’’), $395,000,000, which shall be available
for the period April 1, 2026 through June 30,
2027, and may be recaptured and reobligated
in accordance with section 517(c) of the OAA.
FEDERAL UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS AND
ALLOWANCES

For payments during fiscal year 2026 of
trade adjustment benefit payments and allowances under part I of subchapter B of
chapter 2 of title II of the Trade Act of 1974,
and section 246 of that Act; and for training,
employment and case management services,
allowances for job search and relocation, and
related State administrative expenses under
part II of subchapter B of chapter 2 of title
II of the Trade Act of 1974, and including
benefit payments, allowances, training, employment and case management services,
and related State administration provided
pursuant to section 231(a) of the Trade Adjustment Assistance Extension Act of 2011,
sections 405(a) and 406 of the Trade Preferences Extension Act of 2015, and section
285(a) of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended,
$50,300,000 together with such amounts as
may be necessary to be charged to the subsequent appropriation for payments for any period subsequent to September 15, 2026: Provided, That notwithstanding section 502 of
this Act, any part of the appropriation provided under this heading may remain available for obligation beyond the current fiscal
year pursuant to the authorities of section
245(c) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C.
2317(c)).

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1212
STATE UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE AND
EMPLOYMENT SERVICE OPERATIONS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For authorized administrative expenses,
$74,306,000, together with not to exceed
$4,000,584,000 which may be expended from
the Employment Security Administration
Account in the Unemployment Trust Fund
(‘‘the Trust Fund’’), of which—
(1) $3,226,635,000 from the Trust Fund is for
grants to States for the administration of
State unemployment insurance laws as authorized under title III of the Social Security
Act (including not less than $467,000,000 to
carry out reemployment services and eligibility assessments under section 306 of such
Act, any claimants of regular compensation,
as defined in such section, including those
who are profiled as most likely to exhaust
their benefits, may be eligible for such services and assessments: Provided, That of such
amount, $117,000,000 is specified for grants
under section 306 of the Social Security Act
and is provided to meet the terms of a concurrent resolution on the budget and
$350,000,000 is additional new budget authority specified for purposes of a concurrent resolution on the budget; and $9,000,000 for continued support of the Unemployment Insurance Integrity Center of Excellence), the administration of unemployment insurance for
Federal employees and for ex-service members as authorized under 5 U.S.C. 8501–8523,
and the administration of trade readjustment allowances, reemployment trade adjustment assistance, and alternative trade
adjustment assistance under the Trade Act
of 1974 and under section 231(a) of the Trade
Adjustment Assistance Extension Act of
2011, sections 405(a) and 406 of the Trade
Preferences Extension Act of 2015, and section 285(a) of the Trade Act of 1974, as
amended, and shall be available for Federal
obligation through December 31, 2026, except
that funds for outcome payments pursuant
to section 306(f)(2) of the Social Security Act
shall be available for Federal obligation
through March 31, 2027: Provided, That notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
Secretary may recapture any funds appropriated under this paragraph that remain unexpended by a State after the period of expenditure for a State (but before such funds
have been returned to the Trust Fund), and
such recaptured funds shall remain available
until expended for reobligation by the Secretary to the States to carry out automation
activities related to the administration of
unemployment compensation laws: Provided
further, That funds transferred pursuant to
the preceding proviso shall not be available
until 60 days after the Secretary has submitted a plan to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate on the planned use of funds;
(2) $18,000,000 from the Trust Fund is for
national activities necessary to support the
administration of the Federal-State unemployment insurance system;
(3) $653,639,000 from the Trust Fund, together with $21,413,000 from the General
Fund of the Treasury, is for grants to States
in accordance with section 6 of the WagnerPeyser Act, and shall be available for Federal obligation for the period July 1, 2026
through June 30, 2027;
(4) $17,500,000 from the Trust Fund is for
national activities of the Employment Service, including administration of the work opportunity tax credit under section 51 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (including assisting States in adopting or modernizing information technology for use in the processing of certification requests), and the provision of technical assistance and staff training under the Wagner-Peyser Act;
(5) $84,810,000 from the Trust Fund is for
the administration of foreign labor certifi-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

cations and related activities under the Immigration and Nationality Act and related
laws, of which $61,528,000 shall be available
for the Federal administration of such activities, and $23,282,000 shall be available for
grants to States for the administration of
such activities; and
(6) $52,893,000 from the General Fund is to
provide workforce information, national
electronic tools, and one-stop system building under the Wagner-Peyser Act and shall
be available for Federal obligation for the
period July 1, 2026 through June 30, 2027, of
which up to $9,800,000 may be used to carry
out research and demonstration projects related to testing effective ways to promote
greater labor force participation of people
with disabilities: Provided, That the Secretary may transfer amounts made available
for research and demonstration projects
under this paragraph to the ‘‘Office of Disability Employment Policy’’ account for
such purposes:
Provided, That to the extent that the Average
Weekly
Insured
Unemployment
(‘‘AWIU’’) for fiscal year 2026 is projected by
the Department of Labor to exceed 3,075,000,
an additional $28,600,000 from the Trust Fund
shall be available for obligation for every
100,000 increase in the AWIU level (including
a pro rata amount for any increment less
than 100,000) to carry out title III of the Social Security Act: Provided further, That
funds appropriated in this Act that are allotted to a State to carry out activities under
title III of the Social Security Act may be
used by such State to assist other States in
carrying out activities under such title III if
the other States include areas that have suffered a major disaster declared by the President under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act: Provided further, That the Secretary may use
funds appropriated for grants to States
under title III of the Social Security Act to
make payments on behalf of States for the
use of the National Directory of New Hires
under section 453(j)(8) of such Act: Provided
further, That the Secretary may use funds
appropriated for grants to States under title
III of the Social Security Act to make payments on behalf of States to the entity operating the State Information Data Exchange
System: Provided further, That funds appropriated in this Act which are used to establish a national one-stop career center system, or which are used to support the national activities of the Federal-State unemployment insurance, employment service, or
immigration programs, may be obligated in
contracts, grants, or agreements with States
and non-State entities: Provided further, That
States awarded competitive grants for improved operations under title III of the Social Security Act, or awarded grants to support the national activities of the FederalState unemployment insurance system, may
award subgrants to other States and nonState entities under such grants, subject to
the conditions applicable to the grants: Provided further, That funds appropriated under
this Act for activities authorized under title
III of the Social Security Act and the Wagner-Peyser Act may be used by States to
fund integrated Unemployment Insurance
and Employment Service automation efforts,
notwithstanding cost allocation principles
prescribed under the final rule entitled ‘‘Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost
Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards’’ at part 200 of title 2, Code of
Federal Regulations: Provided further, That
the Secretary, at the request of a State participating in a consortium with other States,
may reallot funds allotted to such State
under title III of the Social Security Act to
other States participating in the consortium
or to the entity operating the Unemploy-

PO 00000

Frm 00038

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ment Insurance Information Technology
Support Center in order to carry out activities that benefit the administration of the
unemployment compensation law of the
State making the request: Provided further,
That the Secretary may collect fees for the
costs associated with additional data collection, analyses, and reporting services relating to the National Agricultural Workers
Survey requested by State and local governments, public and private institutions of
higher education, and nonprofit organizations and may utilize such sums, in accordance with the provisions of 29 U.S.C. 9a, for
the National Agricultural Workers Survey
infrastructure, methodology, and data to
meet the information collection and reporting needs of such entities, which shall be
credited to this appropriation and shall remain available until September 30, 2027, for
such purposes.
ADVANCES TO THE UNEMPLOYMENT TRUST FUND
AND OTHER FUNDS

For repayable advances to the Unemployment Trust Fund as authorized by sections
905(d) and 1203 of the Social Security Act,
and to the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund
as authorized by section 9501(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; and for nonrepayable advances to the revolving fund established by section 901(e) of the Social Security Act, to the Unemployment Trust
Fund as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 8509, and to
the ‘‘Federal Unemployment Benefits and
Allowances’’ account, such sums as may be
necessary, which shall be available for obligation through September 30, 2027.
PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

For expenses of administering employment
and training programs, $104,527,000, together
with not to exceed $53,906,000 which shall be
available from the Employment Security Administration Account in the Unemployment
Trust Fund.
VETERANS’ EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING
VETERANS’ EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING
SERVICE

Not to exceed $269,841,000 may be derived
from the Employment Security Administration account in the Unemployment Trust
Fund to carry out the provisions of chapters
41, 42, and 43 of title 38, United States Code,
of which—
(1) $185,000,000 is for Jobs for Veterans
State grants under 38 U.S.C. 4102A(b)(5) to
support disabled veterans’ outreach program
specialists under section 4103A of such title
and local veterans’ employment representatives under section 4104(b) of such title, and
for the expenses described in section
4102A(b)(5)(C), which shall be available for
expenditure by the States through September 30, 2028, and not to exceed 3 percent
for the necessary Federal expenditures for
data systems and contract support to allow
for the tracking of participant and performance information: Provided, That, in addition, such funds may be used to support such
specialists and representatives in the provision of services to transitioning members of
the Armed Forces who have participated in
the Transition Assistance Program and have
been identified as in need of intensive services, to members of the Armed Forces who
are wounded, ill, or injured and receiving
treatment in military treatment facilities or
warrior transition units, to the spouses or
other family caregivers of such wounded, ill,
or injured members, and to surviving spouses
of individuals who died while serving as
members of the Armed Forces or as a result
of a service-connected disability;
(2) $34,379,000 is for carrying out the Transition Assistance Program under 38 U.S.C.
4113 and 10 U.S.C. 1144;

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

(3) $47,048,000 is for Federal administration
of chapters 41, 42, and 43 of title 38, and sections 2021, 2021A and 2023 of title 38, United
States Code: Provided, That up to $500,000
may be used to carry out the Hire VETS Act
(division O of Public Law 115–31); and
(4) $3,414,000 is for the National Veterans’
Employment and Training Services Institute
under 38 U.S.C. 4109:
Provided, That the Secretary may reallocate
among the appropriations provided under
paragraphs (1) through (4) above an amount
not to exceed 3 percent of the appropriation
from which such reallocation is made.
In addition, from the General Fund of the
Treasury, $65,500,000 is for carrying out programs to assist homeless veterans and veterans at risk of homelessness who are
transitioning from certain institutions under
sections 2021, 2021A, and 2023 of title 38,
United States Code: Provided, That notwithstanding subsections (c)(3) and (d) of section
2023, the Secretary may award grants
through September 30, 2026, to provide services under such section: Provided further,
That services provided under sections 2021 or
under 2021A may include, in addition to services to homeless veterans described in section 2002(a)(1), services to veterans who were
homeless at some point within the 60 days
prior to program entry or veterans who are
at risk of homelessness within the next 60
days, and that services provided under section 2023 may include, in addition to services
to the individuals described in subsection (e)
of such section, services to veterans recently
released from incarceration who are at risk
of homelessness: Provided further, That notwithstanding paragraph (3) under this heading, funds appropriated in this paragraph
may be used for data systems and contract
support to allow for the tracking of participant and performance information: Provided
further,
That
notwithstanding
sections
2021(e)(2) and 2021A(f)(2) of title 38, United
States Code, such funds shall be available for
expenditure pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 1553.
In addition, fees may be assessed and deposited in the HIRE Vets Medallion Award
Fund pursuant to section 5(b) of the HIRE
Vets Act, and such amounts shall be available to the Secretary to carry out the HIRE
Vets Medallion Award Program, as authorized by such Act, and shall remain available
until expended: Provided, That such sums
shall be in addition to any other funds available for such purposes, including funds available under paragraph (3) of this heading: Provided further, That section 2(d) of division O
of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2017
(Public Law 115–31; 38 U.S.C. 4100 note) shall
not apply.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses for the Wage and
Hour Division, including reimbursement to
State, Federal, and local agencies and their
employees for inspection services rendered,
$260,000,000.
OFFICE OF LABOR-MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses for the Office of
Labor-Management Standards, $48,515,000.
OFFICE OF FEDERAL CONTRACT COMPLIANCE
PROGRAMS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses for the Office of
Federal Contract Compliance Programs,
$100,976,000.
OFFICE OF WORKERS’ COMPENSATION
PROGRAMS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses for the Office of
Workers’
Compensation
Programs,
$120,500,000, together with $2,205,000 which
may be expended from the Special Fund in
accordance with sections 39(c), 44(d), and
44(j) of the Longshore and Harbor Workers’
Compensation Act.
SPECIAL BENEFITS

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For the payment of compensation, benefits, and expenses (except administrative expenses not otherwise authorized) accruing
during the current or any prior fiscal year
authorized by 5 U.S.C. 81; continuation of
benefits as provided for under the heading
‘‘Civilian War Benefits’’ in the Federal Security Agency Appropriation Act, 1947; the Employees’ Compensation Commission Appropriation Act, 1944; section 5(f) of the War
Claims Act (50 U.S.C. App. 2012); obligations
incurred under the War Hazards Compensation Act (42 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.); and 50 percent of the additional compensation and benefits required by section 10(h) of the
Longshore and Harbor Workers’ Compensation Act, $1,298,385,000, together with such
amounts as may be necessary to be charged
to the subsequent year appropriation for the
payment of compensation and other benefits
for any period subsequent to August 15 of the
current year, for deposit into and to assume

PENSION BENEFIT GUARANTY CORPORATION
FUND

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

ministrative expenses, through September
30, 2026, for the Corporation: Provided, That
none of the funds available to the Corporation for fiscal year 2026 shall be available for
obligations for administrative expenses in
excess of $494,264,000: Provided further, That
to the extent that the number of new plan
participants in plans terminated by the Corporation exceeds 100,000 in fiscal year 2026,
an amount not to exceed an additional
$9,200,000 shall be available through September 30, 2030, for obligations for administrative expenses for every 20,000 additional
terminated participants: Provided further,
That obligations in excess of the amounts
provided for administrative expenses in this
paragraph may be incurred and shall be
available through September 30, 2030 for obligation for unforeseen and extraordinary pretermination or termination expenses or extraordinary multiemployer program related
expenses after approval by the Office of Management and Budget and notification of the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate: Provided
further, That an additional amount shall be
available for obligation through September
30, 2030 to the extent the Corporation’s costs
exceed $250,000 for the provision of credit or
identity monitoring to affected individuals
upon suffering a security incident or privacy
breach, not to exceed an additional $100 per
affected individual.
WAGE AND HOUR DIVISION

For necessary expenses for the Employee
Benefits
Security
Administration,
$191,100,000, of which up to $3,000,000 shall be
made available through September 30, 2027,
for the procurement of expert witnesses for
enforcement litigation.
PENSION BENEFIT GUARANTY CORPORATION

The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
(‘‘Corporation’’) is authorized to make such
expenditures, including financial assistance
authorized by subtitle E of title IV of the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act
of 1974, within limits of funds and borrowing
authority available to the Corporation, and
in accord with law, and to make such contracts and commitments without regard to
fiscal year limitations, as provided by 31
U.S.C. 9104, as may be necessary in carrying
out the program, including associated ad-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1213

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00039

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

the attributes of the Employees’ Compensation Fund established under 5 U.S.C. 8147(a):
Provided, That amounts appropriated may be
used under 5 U.S.C. 8104 by the Secretary to
reimburse an employer, who is not the employer at the time of injury, for portions of
the salary of a re-employed, disabled beneficiary: Provided further, That balances of reimbursements unobligated on September 30,
2025, shall remain available until expended
for the payment of compensation, benefits,
and expenses: Provided further, That in addition there shall be transferred to this appropriation from the Postal Service and from
any other corporation or instrumentality required under 5 U.S.C. 8147(c) to pay an
amount for its fair share of the cost of administration, such sums as the Secretary determines to be the cost of administration for
employees of such fair share entities through
September 30, 2026: Provided further, That of
those funds transferred to this account from
the fair share entities to pay the cost of administration of the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act, $81,808,000 shall be made
available to the Secretary as follows:
(1) For enhancement and maintenance of
automated data processing systems operations and telecommunications systems,
$27,549,000;
(2) For automated workload processing operations, including document imaging, centralized mail intake, and medical bill processing, $25,956,000;
(3) For periodic roll disability management
and medical review, $25,957,000;
(4) For program integrity, $2,346,000; and
(5) The remaining funds shall be paid into
the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts:
Provided further, That the Secretary may require that any person filing a notice of injury or a claim for benefits under 5 U.S.C. 81,
or the Longshore and Harbor Workers’ Compensation Act, provide as part of such notice
and claim, such identifying information (including Social Security account number) as
such regulations may prescribe.
SPECIAL BENEFITS FOR DISABLED COAL MINERS

For carrying out title IV of the Federal
Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977, as
amended by Public Law 107–275, $24,585,000, to
remain available until expended.
For making after July 31 of the current fiscal year, benefit payments to individuals
under title IV of such Act, for costs incurred
in the current fiscal year, such amounts as
may be necessary.
For making benefit payments under title
IV for the first quarter of fiscal year 2027,
$5,900,000, to remain available until expended.
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES, ENERGY EMPLOYEES OCCUPATIONAL ILLNESS COMPENSATION
FUND

For necessary expenses to administer the
Energy Employees Occupational Illness
Compensation Program Act, $68,148,000, to
remain available until expended: Provided,
That the Secretary may require that any
person filing a claim for benefits under the
Act provide as part of such claim such identifying information (including Social Security account number) as may be prescribed.
BLACK LUNG DISABILITY TRUST FUND
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

Such sums as may be necessary from the
Black Lung Disability Trust Fund (the
‘‘Fund’’), to remain available until expended,
for payment of all benefits authorized by section 9501(d)(1), (2), (6), and (7) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986; and repayment of, and
payment of interest on advances, as authorized by section 9501(d)(4) of that Act. In addition, the following amounts may be expended
from the Fund for fiscal year 2026 for expenses of operation and administration of

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1214

the Black Lung Benefits program, as authorized by section 9501(d)(5): not to exceed
$50,684,000 for transfer to the Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs, ‘‘Salaries and
Expenses’’; not to exceed $39,086,000 for transfer to Departmental Management, ‘‘Salaries
and Expenses’’; not to exceed $373,000 for
transfer to Departmental Management, ‘‘Office of Inspector General’’; and not to exceed
$356,000 for payments into miscellaneous receipts for the expenses of the Department of
the Treasury.
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH
ADMINISTRATION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

For necessary expenses for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
$629,309,000,
including
not
to
exceed
$120,000,000 which shall be the maximum
amount available for grants to States under
section 23(g) of the Occupational Safety and
Health Act (the ‘‘Act’’), which grants shall
be no less than 50 percent of the costs of
State occupational safety and health programs required to be incurred under plans
approved by the Secretary under section 18
of the Act; and, in addition, notwithstanding
31 U.S.C. 3302, the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration may retain up to
$499,000 per fiscal year of training institute
course tuition and fees, otherwise authorized
by law to be collected, and may utilize such
sums for occupational safety and health
training and education: Provided, That notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 3302, the Secretary is
authorized, during the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, to collect and retain fees
for services provided to Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratories, and may utilize
such sums, in accordance with the provisions
of 29 U.S.C. 9a, to administer national and
international laboratory recognition programs that ensure the safety of equipment
and products used by workers in the workplace: Provided further, That none of the
funds appropriated under this paragraph
shall be obligated or expended to prescribe,
issue, administer, or enforce any standard,
rule, regulation, or order under the Act
which is applicable to any person who is engaged in a farming operation which does not
maintain a temporary labor camp and employs 10 or fewer employees: Provided further,
That no funds appropriated under this paragraph shall be obligated or expended to administer or enforce any standard, rule, regulation, or order under the Act with respect to
any employer of 10 or fewer employees who is
included within a category having a Days
Away, Restricted, or Transferred (‘‘DART’’)
occupational injury and illness rate, at the
most precise industrial classification code
for which such data are published, less than
the national average rate as such rates are
most recently published by the Secretary,
acting through the Bureau of Labor Statistics, in accordance with section 24 of the
Act, except—
(1) to provide, as authorized by the Act,
consultation, technical assistance, educational and training services, and to conduct surveys and studies;
(2) to conduct an inspection or investigation in response to an employee complaint,
to issue a citation for violations found during such inspection, and to assess a penalty
for violations which are not corrected within
a reasonable abatement period and for any
willful violations found;
(3) to take any action authorized by the
Act with respect to imminent dangers;
(4) to take any action authorized by the
Act with respect to health hazards;
(5) to take any action authorized by the
Act with respect to a report of an employment accident which is fatal to one or more
employees or which results in hospitaliza-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

tion of two or more employees, and to take
any action pursuant to such investigation
authorized by the Act; and
(6) to take any action authorized by the
Act with respect to complaints of discrimination against employees for exercising
rights under the Act:
Provided further, That the foregoing proviso
shall not apply to any person who is engaged
in a farming operation which does not maintain a temporary labor camp and employs 10
or fewer employees: Provided further, That
$12,787,000 shall be available for Susan Harwood training grants: Provided further, That
$243,000,000 shall be for Federal Enforcement:
Provided further, That not less than $3,500,000
shall be for Voluntary Protection Programs.
MINE SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses for the Mine Safety
and Health Administration, $387,816,000, including purchase and bestowal of certificates
and trophies in connection with mine rescue
and first-aid work, and the hire of passenger
motor vehicles, including up to $2,000,000 for
mine rescue and recovery activities and not
less than $10,537,000 for State assistance
grants: Provided, That notwithstanding 31
U.S.C. 3302, not to exceed $750,000 may be collected by the National Mine Health and Safety Academy for room, board, tuition, and the
sale of training materials, otherwise authorized by law to be collected, to be available
for mine safety and health education and
training activities: Provided further, That
notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 3302, the Mine
Safety and Health Administration is authorized to collect and retain up to $2,499,000
from fees collected for the approval and certification of equipment, materials, and explosives for use in mines, and may utilize
such sums for such activities: Provided further, That the Secretary is authorized to accept lands, buildings, equipment, and other
contributions from public and private
sources and to prosecute projects in cooperation with other agencies, Federal, State, or
private: Provided further, That the Mine Safety and Health Administration is authorized
to promote health and safety education and
training in the mining community through
cooperative programs with States, industry,
and safety associations: Provided further,
That the Secretary is authorized to recognize the Joseph A. Holmes Safety Association as a principal safety association and,
notwithstanding any other provision of law,
may provide funds and, with or without reimbursement, personnel, including service of
Mine Safety and Health Administration officials as officers in local chapters or in the
national organization: Provided further, That
any funds available to the Department of
Labor may be used, with the approval of the
Secretary, to provide for the costs of mine
rescue and survival operations in the event
of a major disaster.
BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses for the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, including advances or reimbursements to State, Federal, and local
agencies and their employees for services
rendered, $640,500,000, together with not to
exceed $68,000,000 which may be expended
from the Employment Security Administration account in the Unemployment Trust
Fund.
OFFICE OF DISABILITY EMPLOYMENT POLICY
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses for the Office of
Disability Employment Policy to provide
leadership, develop policy and initiatives,
and award grants furthering the objective of

PO 00000

Frm 00040

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

eliminating barriers to the training and employment of people with disabilities,
$43,000,000, of which not less than $9,000,000
shall be for research and demonstration
projects related to testing effective ways to
promote greater labor force participation of
people with disabilities: Provided, That the
Secretary may transfer amounts made available under this heading for research and
demonstration projects to the ‘‘State Unemployment Insurance and Employment Service Operations’’ account for such purposes.
DEPARTMENTAL MANAGEMENT
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses for Departmental
Management, including the hire of three passenger motor vehicles, $362,877,000, together
with not to exceed $308,000, which may be expended from the Employment Security Administration account in the Unemployment
Trust Fund: Provided, That $116,125,000 shall
be for the Bureau of International Labor Affairs, of which $81,725,000 shall be available
for obligation through December 31, 2026:
Provided further, That funds available to the
Bureau of International Labor Affairs may
be used to administer or operate international labor activities, bilateral and multilateral technical assistance, and microfinance programs, by or through contracts,
grants, subgrants and other arrangements:
Provided further, That not less than
$30,175,000 shall be for programs to combat
exploitative child labor internationally and
not less than $30,175,000 shall be used to implement model programs that address worker rights issues through technical assistance
in countries with which the United States
has free trade agreements or trade preference programs: Provided further, That
$4,281,000 shall be used for program evaluation and shall be available for obligation
through September 30, 2027: Provided further,
That funds available for program evaluation
may be used to administer grants for the
purpose of evaluation: Provided further, That
grants made for the purpose of evaluation
shall be awarded through fair and open competition: Provided further, That funds available for program evaluation may be transferred to any other appropriate account in
the Department for such purpose: Provided
further, That the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate are notified at least 15 days in advance of any transfer: Provided further, That
$23,000,000 shall be for the Women’s Bureau
and may be used for grants to serve and promote the interests of women in the workforce: Provided further, That of the amounts
made available to the Women’s Bureau, not
less than $5,000,000 shall be used for grants
authorized by the Women in Apprenticeship
and Nontraditional Occupations Act: Provided further, That the Department of Labor
shall support staffing levels necessary to fulfill its statutory responsibilities including
carrying out programs, projects, and activities funded in this title of this Act in a timely manner.
IT MODERNIZATION

For necessary expenses for Department of
Labor centralized infrastructure technology
investment activities related to support systems and modernization, $6,889,000, which
shall be available through September 30,
2027.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

For salaries and expenses of the Office of
Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of the Inspector General Act of 1978,
$91,187,000, together with not to exceed
$5,841,000 which may be expended from the
Employment Security Administration account in the Unemployment Trust Fund:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

Provided, That not more than $2,000,000 of the
amount provided under this heading may be
available until expended.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 101. None of the funds appropriated by
this Act for the Job Corps shall be used to
pay the salary and bonuses of an individual,
either as direct costs or any proration as an
indirect cost, at a rate in excess of Executive
Level II.
(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 102. Not to exceed 1 percent of any discretionary funds (pursuant to the Balanced
Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act
of 1985) which are appropriated for the current fiscal year for the Department of Labor
in this Act may be transferred between a
program, project, or activity, but no such
program, project, or activity shall be increased by more than 3 percent by any such
transfer: Provided, That the transfer authority granted by this section shall not be used
to create any new program or to fund any
project or activity for which no funds are
provided in this Act: Provided further, That
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate are
notified at least 15 days in advance of any
transfer.
SEC. 103. In accordance with Executive
Order 13126, none of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available pursuant to this
Act shall be obligated or expended for the
procurement of goods mined, produced, manufactured, or harvested or services rendered,
in whole or in part, by forced or indentured
child labor in industries and host countries
already identified by the United States Department of Labor prior to enactment of this
Act.
SEC. 104. Except as otherwise provided in
this section, none of the funds made available to the Department of Labor for grants
under section 414(c) of the American Competitiveness and Workforce Improvement
Act of 1998 (29 U.S.C. 2916a) may be used for
any purpose other than competitive grants
for training individuals who are older than 16
years of age and are not currently enrolled
in school within a local educational agency
in the occupations and industries for which
employers are using H–1B visas to hire foreign workers, and the related activities necessary to support such training.
SEC. 105. None of the funds made available
by this Act under the heading ‘‘Employment
and Training Administration’’ shall be used
by a recipient or subrecipient of such funds
to pay the salary and bonuses of an individual, either as direct costs or indirect
costs, at a rate in excess of Executive Level
II. This limitation shall not apply to vendors
providing goods and services as defined in Office of Management and Budget Circular A–
133. Where States are recipients of such
funds, States may establish a lower limit for
salaries and bonuses of those receiving salaries and bonuses from subrecipients of such
funds, taking into account factors including
the relative cost-of-living in the State, the
compensation levels for comparable State or
local government employees, and the size of
the organizations that administer Federal
programs involved including Employment
and Training Administration programs.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 106. (a) Notwithstanding section 102,
the Secretary may transfer funds made
available to the Employment and Training
Administration by this Act, either directly
or through a set-aside, for technical assistance services to grantees to ‘‘Program Administration’’ when it is determined that
those services will be more efficiently performed by Federal employees: Provided, That
this section shall not apply to section 171 of
the WIOA.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1215

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(b) Notwithstanding section 102, the Secretary may transfer not more than 0.5 percent of each discretionary appropriation
made available to the Employment and
Training Administration by this Act to
‘‘Program Administration’’ in order to carry
out program integrity activities relating to
any of the programs or activities that are
funded under any such discretionary appropriations: Provided, That notwithstanding
section 102 and the preceding proviso, the
Secretary may transfer not more than 0.5
percent of funds made available in paragraphs (1) and (2) of the ‘‘Office of Job Corps’’
account to paragraph (3) of such account to
carry out program integrity activities related to the Job Corps program: Provided further, That funds transferred under this subsection shall be available to the Secretary to
carry out program integrity activities directly or through grants, cooperative agreements, contracts and other arrangements
with States and other appropriate entities:
Provided further, That funds transferred
under the authority provided by this subsection shall be available for obligation
through September 30, 2027.
(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 107. (a) The Secretary may reserve not
more than 0.75 percent from each appropriation made available in this Act identified in
subsection (b) in order to carry out evaluations of any of the programs or activities
that are funded under such accounts. Any
funds reserved under this section shall be
transferred to ‘‘Departmental Management’’
for use by the Office of the Chief Evaluation
Officer within the Department of Labor, and
shall be available for obligation through
September 30, 2027: Provided, That such funds
shall only be available if the Chief Evaluation Officer of the Department of Labor submits a plan to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate describing the evaluations to be
carried out 15 days in advance of any transfer.
(b) The accounts referred to in subsection
(a) are: ‘‘Training and Employment Services’’, ‘‘Job Corps’’, ‘‘Community Service
Employment for Older Americans’’, ‘‘State
Unemployment Insurance and Employment
Service Operations’’, ‘‘Employee Benefits Security Administration’’, ‘‘Office of Workers’
Compensation Programs’’, ‘‘Wage and Hour
Division’’, ‘‘Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs’’, ‘‘Office of Labor Management Standards’’, ‘‘Occupational Safety and
Health Administration’’, ‘‘Mine Safety and
Health Administration’’, ‘‘Office of Disability Employment Policy’’, funding made
available to the ‘‘Bureau of International
Labor Affairs’’ and ‘‘Women’s Bureau’’ within the ‘‘Departmental Management, Salaries
and Expenses’’ account, and ‘‘Veterans’ Employment and Training’’.
SEC. 108. (a) Section 7 of the Fair Labor
Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 207) shall be
applied as if the following text is part of
such section:
‘‘(s)(1) The provisions of this section shall
not apply for a period of 2 years after the occurrence of a major disaster to any employee—
‘‘(A) employed to adjust or evaluate claims
resulting from or relating to such major disaster, by an employer not engaged, directly
or through an affiliate, in underwriting, selling, or marketing property, casualty, or liability insurance policies or contracts;
‘‘(B) who receives from such employer on
average weekly compensation of not less
than $591.00 per week or any minimum weekly amount established by the Secretary,
whichever is greater, for the number of
weeks such employee is engaged in any of
the activities described in subparagraph (C);
and

PO 00000

Frm 00041

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

‘‘(C) whose duties include any of the following:
‘‘(i) interviewing insured individuals, individuals who suffered injuries or other damages or losses arising from or relating to a
disaster, witnesses, or physicians;
‘‘(ii) inspecting property damage or reviewing factual information to prepare damage
estimates;
‘‘(iii) evaluating and making recommendations regarding coverage or compensability
of claims or determining liability or value
aspects of claims;
‘‘(iv) negotiating settlements; or
‘‘(v) making recommendations regarding
litigation.
‘‘(2) The exemption in this subsection shall
not affect the exemption provided by section
13(a)(1).
‘‘(3) For purposes of this subsection—
‘‘(A) the term ‘major disaster’ means any
disaster or catastrophe declared or designated by any State or Federal agency or
department;
‘‘(B) the term ‘employee employed to adjust or evaluate claims resulting from or relating to such major disaster’ means an individual who timely secured or secures a license required by applicable law to engage in
and perform the activities described in
clauses (i) through (v) of paragraph (1)(C) relating to a major disaster, and is employed
by an employer that maintains worker compensation insurance coverage or protection
for its employees, if required by applicable
law, and withholds applicable Federal, State,
and local income and payroll taxes from the
wages, salaries and any benefits of such employees; and
‘‘(C) the term ‘affiliate’ means a company
that, by reason of ownership or control of 25
percent or more of the outstanding shares of
any class of voting securities of one or more
companies, directly or indirectly, controls,
is controlled by, or is under common control
with, another company.’’.
(b) This section shall be effective on the
date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 109. (a) FLEXIBILITY WITH RESPECT TO
THE CROSSING OF H–2B NONIMMIGRANTS WORKING IN THE SEAFOOD INDUSTRY.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Subject to paragraph (2),
if a petition for H–2B nonimmigrants filed by
an employer in the seafood industry is granted, the employer may bring the nonimmigrants described in the petition into
the United States at any time during the 120day period beginning on the start date for
which the employer is seeking the services of
the nonimmigrants without filing another
petition.
(2) REQUIREMENTS FOR CROSSINGS AFTER
90TH DAY.—An employer in the seafood industry may not bring H–2B nonimmigrants into
the United States after the date that is 90
days after the start date for which the employer is seeking the services of the nonimmigrants unless the employer—
(A) completes a new assessment of the
local labor market by—
(i) listing job orders in local newspapers on
2 separate Sundays; and
(ii) posting the job opportunity on the appropriate Department of Labor Electronic
Job Registry and at the employer’s place of
employment; and
(B) offers the job to an equally or better
qualified United States worker who—
(i) applies for the job; and
(ii) will be available at the time and place
of need.
(3) EXEMPTION FROM RULES WITH RESPECT TO
STAGGERING.—The Secretary of Labor shall
not consider an employer in the seafood industry who brings H–2B nonimmigrants into
the United States during the 120-day period
specified in paragraph (1) to be staggering
the date of need in violation of section

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1216

655.20(d) of title 20, Code of Federal Regulations, or any other applicable provision of
law.
(b) H–2B NONIMMIGRANTS DEFINED.—In this
section, the term ‘‘H–2B nonimmigrants’’
means aliens admitted to the United States
pursuant to section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(B) of the
Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C.
1101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(B)).
SEC. 110. The determination of prevailing
wage for the purposes of the H–2B program
shall be the greater of—(1) the actual wage
level paid by the employer to other employees with similar experience and qualifications for such position in the same location;
or (2) the prevailing wage level for the occupational classification of the position in the
geographic area in which the H–2B nonimmigrant will be employed, based on the
best information available at the time of filing the petition. In the determination of prevailing wage for the purposes of the H–2B
program, the Secretary shall accept private
wage surveys even in instances where Occupational Employment Statistics survey data
are available unless the Secretary determines that the methodology and data in the
provided survey are not statistically supported.
SEC. 111. None of the funds in this Act shall
be used to enforce the definition of corresponding employment found in 20 CFR
655.5 or the three-fourths guarantee rule definition found in 20 CFR 655.20, or any references thereto. Further, for the purpose of
regulating admission of temporary workers
under the H–2B program, the definition of
temporary need shall be that provided in 8
CFR 214.2(h)(6)(ii)(B).
SEC. 112. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary may furnish
through grants, cooperative agreements,
contracts, and other arrangements, up to
$450,000 of excess personal property, at a
value determined by the Secretary, to apprenticeship programs for the purpose of
training apprentices in those programs.
SEC. 113. (a) The Act entitled ‘‘An Act to
create a Department of Labor’’, approved
March 4, 1913 (37 Stat. 736, chapter 141) is
amended by adding at the end the following
new section:
‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary of Labor
is authorized to employ law enforcement officers or special agents to—
‘‘(1) provide protection for the Secretary of
Labor during the workday of the Secretary
and during any activity that is preliminary
or postliminary to the performance of official duties by the Secretary;
‘‘(2) provide protection, incidental to the
protection provided to the Secretary, to a
member of the immediate family of the Secretary who is participating in an activity or
event relating to the official duties of the
Secretary;
‘‘(3) provide continuous protection to the
Secretary (including during periods not described in paragraph (1)) and to the members
of the immediate family of the Secretary if
there is a unique and articulable threat of
physical harm, in accordance with guidelines
established by the Secretary; and
‘‘(4) provide protection to the Deputy Secretary of Labor or another senior officer representing the Secretary of Labor at a public
event if there is a unique and articulable
threat of physical harm, in accordance with
guidelines established by the Secretary.
‘‘(b) AUTHORITIES.—The Secretary of Labor
may authorize a law enforcement officer or
special agent employed under subsection (a),
for the purpose of performing the duties authorized under subsection (a), to—
‘‘(1) carry firearms;
‘‘(2) make arrests without a warrant for
any offense against the United States committed in the presence of such officer or special agent;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

‘‘(3) perform protective intelligence work,
including identifying and mitigating potential threats and conducting advance work to
review security matters relating to sites and
events;
‘‘(4) coordinate with local law enforcement
agencies; and
‘‘(5) initiate criminal and other investigations into potential threats to the security
of the Secretary, in coordination with the
Inspector General of the Department of
Labor.
‘‘(c) COMPLIANCE WITH GUIDELINES.—A law
enforcement officer or special agent employed under subsection (a) shall exercise
any authority provided under this section in
accordance with any—
‘‘(1) guidelines issued by the Attorney General; and
‘‘(2) guidelines prescribed by the Secretary
of Labor.’’.
(b) This section shall be effective on the
date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 114. The Secretary is authorized to
dispose of or divest, by any means the Secretary determines appropriate, including an
agreement or partnership to construct a new
Job Corps center, all or a portion of the real
property on which the Treasure Island Job
Corps Center and the Gary Job Corps Center
are situated. Any sale or other disposition,
to include any associated construction
project, will not be subject to any requirement of any Federal law or regulation relating to the disposition of Federal real property or relating to Federal procurement, including but not limited to subchapter III of
chapter 5 of title 40 of the United States
Code, subchapter V of chapter 119 of title 42
of the United States Code, and chapter 33 of
division C of subtitle I of title 41 of the
United States Code. The net proceeds of such
a sale shall be transferred to the Secretary,
which shall be available until expended for
such project to carry out the Job Corps Program on Treasure Island and the Job Corps
Program in and around San Marcos, Texas,
respectively.
SEC. 115. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to—
(1) alter or terminate the Interagency
Agreement between the United States Department of Labor and the United States Department of Agriculture;
(2) close any of the Civilian Conservation
Centers, except if such closure is necessary
to prevent the endangerment of the health
and safety of the students, the capacity of
the program is retained, and the requirements of section 159(j) of the WIOA are met;
or
(3) close any Job Corps Centers, except if
such closure meets the criterion entitled
‘‘Long-Term Center Performance’’ or the criterion entitled ‘‘Evaluation of Continuing
Center Operations’’ established by 81 FR
12529, the capacity of the program is retained, and the requirements of section 159(j)
of the WIOA are met.
(RESCISSION)

SEC. 116. Of the unobligated funds available
under section 286(s)(2) of the Immigration
and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1356(s)(2)),
$206,000,000 are hereby permanently rescinded
not later than September 30, 2026.
This title may be cited as the ‘‘Department
of Labor Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
TITLE II
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES
HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES
ADMINISTRATION
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE

For carrying out titles II and III of the
Public Health Service Act (referred to in this
Act as the ‘‘PHS Act’’) with respect to pri-

PO 00000

Frm 00042

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

mary health care and the Native Hawaiian
Health Care Act of 1988, $1,858,772,000: Provided, That no more than $1,000,000 shall be
available until expended for carrying out the
provisions of section 224(o) of the PHS Act:
Provided further, That no more than
$120,000,000 shall be available until expended
for carrying out subsections (g) through (n)
and (q) of section 224 of the PHS Act, and for
expenses incurred by the Department of
Health and Human Services (referred to in
this Act as ‘‘HHS’’) pertaining to administrative claims made under such law.
HEALTH WORKFORCE

For carrying out titles III, VII, and VIII of
the PHS Act with respect to the health
workforce, sections 1128E and 1921 of the Social Security Act, and the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986, $1,413,776,000,
which shall be for the purposes and in the
amounts specified in the ‘‘Final Bill’’ column for Health Workforce in the ‘‘Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services,
Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2026’’ table in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided, That section 751(j)(2) of the
PHS Act and the proportional funding
amounts in paragraphs (1) through (4) of section 756(f) of the PHS Act shall not apply to
funds made available under this heading:
Provided further, That for any program operating under section 751 of the PHS Act on or
before January 1, 2009, the Secretary of
Health and Human Services (referred to in
this title as the ‘‘Secretary’’) may hereafter
waive any of the requirements contained in
sections 751(d)(2)(A) and 751(d)(2)(B) of such
Act for the full project period of a grant
under such section: Provided further, That
section 756(c) of the PHS Act shall apply to
paragraphs (1) through (4) of section 756(a) of
such Act: Provided further, That no funds
shall be available for section 340G–1 of the
PHS Act: Provided further, That fees collected for the disclosure of information
under section 427(b) of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 and sections
1128E(d)(2) and 1921 of the Social Security
Act shall be sufficient to recover the full
costs of operating the programs authorized
by such sections and shall remain available
until expended for the National Practitioner
Data Bank: Provided further, That funds
transferred to this account to carry out section 846 and subpart 3 of part D of title III of
the PHS Act may be used to make prior year
adjustments to awards made under such section and subpart: Provided further, That
amounts made available for the National
Health Service Corps (‘‘NHSC’’) shall remain
available until expended for the purposes of
providing primary health services, assigning
NHSC participants to expand the delivery of
substance use disorder treatment services,
notwithstanding the assignment priorities
and limitations under sections 333(a)(1)(D),
333(b), and 333A(a)(1)(B)(ii) of the PHS Act,
and making payments under the NHSC Loan
Repayment Program under section 338B of
such Act: Provided further, That, within the
amount made available for the NHSC, not
less than 13 percent shall remain available
until expended for the purposes of making
payments under the NHSC Loan Repayment
Program under section 338B of the PHS Act
to individuals participating in such program
who provide primary health services in Indian Health Service facilities, Tribally-Operated 638 Health Programs, and Urban Indian
Health Programs (as those terms are defined
by the Secretary), notwithstanding the assignment priorities and limitations under
section 333(b) of the PHS Act, and $8,000,000
shall remain available until expended for
payments to individuals participating in

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

such program who provide primary health
services in Maternity Care Health Professional Target Areas, as determined by the
Secretary, notwithstanding the assignment
priorities and limitations under section
333(b) of such Act: Provided further, That for
purposes of the previous two provisos, section 331(a)(3)(D) of the PHS Act shall be applied as if the term ‘‘primary health services’’ includes clinical substance use disorder
treatment services, including those provided
by masters level, licensed substance use disorder treatment counselors: Provided further,
That amounts made available for the Nurse
Practitioner Optional Fellowship Program
shall be available to make grants to establish, expand, or maintain optional community-based nurse practitioner fellowship programs that are accredited or in the accreditation process, with a preference for those in
Federally Qualified Health Centers, for practicing postgraduate nurse practitioners in
primary care or behavioral health: Provided
further, That amounts made available for Pediatric Specialty Loan Repayment shall remain available until expended for activities
under section 775 of the PHS Act: Provided
further, That the United States may recover
liquidated damages in an amount determined
by the formula under section 338E(c)(1) of the
PHS Act if an individual either fails to begin
or complete the service obligated by a contract under section 775(b) of the PHS Act:
Provided further, That for purposes of section
775(c)(1) of the PHS Act, the Secretary may
include other mental and behavioral health
disciplines as the Secretary deems appropriate: Provided further, That the Secretary
may terminate a contract entered into under
section 775 of the PHS Act in the same manner articulated in section 206 of this title for
fiscal year 2026 contracts entered into under
section 338B of the PHS Act.
Amounts made available for Medical Student Education shall remain available until
expended for grants to public institutions of
higher education to expand or support graduate education for physicians provided by
such institutions, including funding for infrastructure
development,
maintenance,
equipment, and minor renovations or alterations: Provided, That, in awarding such
grants, the Secretary shall give priority to
public institutions of higher education located in States with a projected primary
care provider shortage, as determined by the
Secretary: Provided further, That grants so
awarded are limited to such public institutions of higher education in States in the top
quartile of States with a projected primary
care provider shortage, as determined by the
Secretary: Provided further, That the minimum amount of a grant so awarded to such
an institution shall be not less than $1,000,000
per year: Provided further, That such a grant
may be awarded for a period not to exceed 5
years: Provided further, That such a grant
awarded with respect to a year to such an institution shall be subject to a matching requirement of non-Federal funds in an
amount that is not more than 10 percent of
the total amount of Federal funds provided
in the grant to such institution with respect
to such year.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH

For carrying out titles III, XI, XII, and
XIX of the PHS Act with respect to maternal
and child health and title V of the Social Security Act, $1,181,680,000, which shall be for
the purposes and in the amounts specified in
the ‘‘Final Bill’’ column for Maternal and
Child Health in the ‘‘Departments of Labor,
Health and Human Services, Education, and
Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2026’’
table in the explanatory statement described
in section 4 (in the matter preceding division
A of this consolidated Act): Provided, That

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1217

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

notwithstanding
sections
502(a)(1)
and
502(b)(1) of the Social Security Act, amounts
made available for Special Projects of Regional and National Significance shall be
available for carrying out special projects of
regional and national significance pursuant
to section 501(a)(2) of such Act and $10,276,000
shall be available for projects described in
subparagraphs (A) through (F) of section
501(a)(3) of such Act, and the budget activities specified in the table under this heading
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act) shall be funded in
the amounts specified in such table.
RYAN WHITE HIV/AIDS PROGRAM
For carrying out title XXVI of the PHS
Act with respect to the Ryan White HIV/
AIDS program, $2,571,041,000, which shall be
for the purposes and in the amounts specified
in the ‘‘Final Bill’’ column for Ryan White
HIV/AIDS Program in the ‘‘Departments of
Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations
Act, 2026’’ table in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act), of which the amounts made available
for Emergency Assistance (Part A) and Comprehensive Care Programs (Part B) shall remain available to the Secretary through
September 30, 2028, for parts A and B of title
XXVI of the PHS Act, and of which the
amounts made available for the AIDS Drug
Assistance Program (ADAP) shall be for
State AIDS Drug Assistance Programs under
the authority of section 2616 or 311(c) of such
Act; and of which the amounts made available for Ending the HIV/AIDS Epidemic Initiative shall remain available until expended
and shall be available to the Secretary for
carrying out a program of grants and contracts under title XXVI or section 311(c) of
such Act focused on ending the nationwide
HIV/AIDS epidemic, with any grants issued
under such section 311(c) administered in
conjunction with title XXVI of the PHS Act,
including the limitation on administrative
expenses.
HEALTH SYSTEMS

For carrying out titles III and XII of the
PHS Act with respect to health care systems, and the Stem Cell Therapeutic and Research Act of 2005, $127,009,000, of which
$122,000 shall be available until expended for
facility renovations and other facilities-related expenses of the Hansen’s Disease Program: Provided, That during the period covered by this Act, the Secretary of Health and
Human Services may collect registration
fees from members of the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (in this
title referred to as ‘‘OPTN’’), authorized
under section 372 of the PHS Act, for each
transplant candidate such members place on
the list described in subsection (b)(2)(A)(i) of
such section, including directly or through
awards made under subsection (b)(1)(A) of
such section: Provided further, That such fees
may be credited to this account, to remain
available until expended, to support the operation of the OPTN: Provided further, That
the Secretary may distribute fees collected
pursuant to the first proviso under this heading among the awardee or awardees described in subsection (b)(1)(A) of section 372
of the PHS Act as the Secretary determines
appropriate.
RURAL HEALTH

For carrying out titles III and IV of the
PHS Act with respect to rural health, section 427(a) of the Federal Coal Mine Health
and Safety Act of 1969, and sections 711 and
1820 of the Social Security Act, $392,907,000,
which shall be for the purposes and in the
amounts specified, other than for ‘‘Rural

PO 00000

Frm 00043

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Hospital Provider Assistance Program’’, in
the ‘‘Final Bill’’ column for Rural Health in
the ‘‘Departments of Labor, Health and
Human Services, Education, and Related
Agencies Appropriations Act, 2026’’ table in
the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of
this consolidated Act), of which the amounts
made available for Rural Hospital Flexibility
Grants shall come from general revenues,
notwithstanding section 1820(j) of the Social
Security Act: Provided, That of the funds
made available under this paragraph for
Rural Hospital Flexibility Grants, up to
$22,942,000 shall be available for the Small
Rural Hospital Improvement Program for
quality improvement and adoption of health
information technology, no less than
$5,000,000 shall be available to award grants
to public or non-profit private entities for
the Rural Emergency Hospital Technical Assistance Program, and up to $1,000,000 shall
be to carry out section 1820(g)(6) of the Social Security Act, with funds provided for
grants under section 1820(g)(6) available for
the purchase and implementation of telehealth services and other efforts to improve
health care coordination for rural veterans
between rural providers and the Department
of Veterans Affairs: Provided further, That
the amounts made available for State Offices
of Rural Health shall be available notwithstanding section 338J(k) of the PHS Act: Provided further, That the amounts for the Rural
Residency Planning and Development Program shall remain available through September 30, 2028.
In addition to amounts otherwise available
for the same purpose, $25,000,000, for making
payments to eligible hospitals for the maintenance of health care providers: Provided,
That eligible hospitals receiving such payment shall meet the following criteria: (1)
have no more than 50 inpatient beds and (2)
have an established wage index value of less
than 0.90 as determined by the Secretary of
Health and Human Services under section
1886(d)(3)(E) of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(3)(E)): Provided further,
That up to 10 percent of funds made available in this paragraph may be used by eligible hospitals for administrative expenses:
Provided further, That payment amounts to
eligible hospitals shall be calculated by dividing available funding equally among such
eligible hospitals.
FAMILY PLANNING

For carrying out the program under title X
of the PHS Act to provide for voluntary family planning projects, $286,479,000: Provided,
That amounts provided to said projects
under such title shall not be expended for
abortions, that all pregnancy counseling
shall be nondirective, and that such amounts
shall not be expended for any activity (including the publication or distribution of literature) that in any way tends to promote
public support or opposition to any legislative proposal or candidate for public office.
HRSA-WIDE ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAM SUPPORT
For carrying out title III of the Public
Health Service Act and for cross-cutting activities and program support for activities
funded in other appropriations included in
this Act for the Health Resources and Services Administration, $1,076,181,000, of which
$45,550,000 shall be for expenses necessary for
the Office for the Advancement of Telehealth, including grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements for the advancement of
telehealth activities: Provided, That funds
made available under this heading may be
used to supplement program support funding
provided under the headings ‘‘Primary
Health Care’’, ‘‘Health Workforce’’, ‘‘Maternal and Child Health’’, ‘‘Ryan White HIV/
AIDS Program’’, ‘‘Health Systems’’, and

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1218

‘‘Rural Health’’: Provided further, That of the
amount made available under this heading,
$857,793,000 shall be used for the projects financing the construction and renovation (including equipment) of health care and other
facilities, and for the projects financing onetime grants that support health-related activities, including training and information
technology, and in the amounts specified in
the table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included for this division in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided further, That none of the funds
made available for projects described in the
preceding proviso shall be subject to section
241 of the PHS Act or section 205 of this Act.
VACCINE INJURY COMPENSATION PROGRAM
TRUST FUND

For payments from the Vaccine Injury
Compensation Program Trust Fund (the
‘‘Trust Fund’’), such sums as may be necessary for claims associated with vaccine-related injury or death with respect to vaccines administered after September 30, 1988,
pursuant to subtitle 2 of title XXI of the PHS
Act, to remain available until expended: Provided, That for necessary administrative expenses, not to exceed $15,200,000 shall be
available from the Trust Fund to the Secretary.
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION
IMMUNIZATION AND RESPIRATORY DISEASES

For carrying out titles II, III, XVII, and
XXI, and section 2821 of the PHS Act, and titles II and IV of the Immigration and Nationality Act, with respect to immunization
and respiratory diseases, $316,901,000.
HIV/AIDS, VIRAL HEPATITIS, SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES, AND TUBERCULOSIS PREVENTION

For carrying out titles II, III, XVII, and
XXIII of the PHS Act with respect to HIV/
AIDS, viral hepatitis, sexually transmitted
diseases,
and
tuberculosis
prevention,
$1,384,056,000.
EMERGING AND ZOONOTIC INFECTIOUS DISEASES

For carrying out titles II, III, and XVII,
and section 2821 of the PHS Act, and titles II
and IV of the Immigration and Nationality
Act, with respect to emerging and zoonotic
infectious diseases, $729,272,000: Provided,
That of the amounts made available under
this heading, up to $1,000,000 from amounts
made available for Quarantine appropriations shall remain available until expended
to pay for the transportation, medical care,
treatment, and other related costs of persons
quarantined or isolated under Federal or
State quarantine law.
CHRONIC DISEASE PREVENTION AND HEALTH
PROMOTION

For carrying out titles II, III, XI, XV,
XVII, and XIX of the PHS Act with respect
to chronic disease prevention and health promotion, $983,830,000: Provided, That funds
made available under this heading may be
available for making grants under section
1509 of the PHS Act for not less than 21
States, Tribes, or Tribal organizations: Provided further, That the proportional funding
requirements under section 1503(a) of the
PHS Act shall not apply to funds made available under this heading.
BIRTH DEFECTS, DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES,
DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

DISABILITIES AND HEALTH

For carrying out titles II, III, XI, and XVII
of the PHS Act with respect to birth defects,
developmental disabilities, disabilities and
health, $205,060,000.
PUBLIC HEALTH SCIENTIFIC SERVICES

For carrying out titles II, III, and XVII of
the PHS Act with respect to health statis-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

tics, surveillance, health informatics, and
workforce development, $724,553,000: Provided, That in addition to amounts provided
herein, $42,944,000 shall be from funds available under section 241 of the PHS Act for
health statistics.
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH

For carrying out titles II, III, and XVII of
the PHS Act with respect to environmental
health, $191,850,000.
INJURY PREVENTION AND CONTROL

For carrying out titles II, III, and XVII of
the PHS Act with respect to injury prevention and control, $761,379,000.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR OCCUPATIONAL
SAFETY AND HEALTH

For carrying out titles II, III, and XVII of
the PHS Act, sections 101, 102, 103, 201, 202,
203, 301, and 501 of the Federal Mine Safety
and Health Act, section 13 of the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response
Act, and sections 20, 21, and 22 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, with respect to
occupational safety and health, $366,800,000.
ENERGY EMPLOYEES OCCUPATIONAL ILLNESS
COMPENSATION PROGRAM

For necessary expenses to administer the
Energy Employees Occupational Illness
Compensation Program Act, $55,358,000, to
remain available until expended: Provided,
That this amount shall be available consistent with the provision regarding administrative expenses in section 151(b) of division
B, title I of Public Law 106–554.
GLOBAL HEALTH

For carrying out titles II, III, and XVII of
the PHS Act with respect to global health,
$692,843,000, of which: (1) the amounts made
available for the Global HIV/AIDS Program
shall remain available through September
30, 2027; and (2) the amounts made available
for the Global Public Health Protection shall
remain available through September 30, 2028:
Provided, That funds may be used for purchase and insurance of official motor vehicles in foreign countries.
PUBLIC HEALTH PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE

For carrying out titles II, III, XVII, and
XXVIII of the PHS Act with respect to public health preparedness and response, and for
expenses necessary to support activities related to countering potential biological, nuclear, radiological, and chemical threats to
civilian populations, $913,200,000: Provided,
That the Director of the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (referred to in this
title as ‘‘CDC’’) or the Administrator of the
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry may detail staff without reimbursement to support an activation of the CDC
Emergency Operations Center, so long as the
Director or Administrator, as applicable,
provides a notice to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate within 15 days of the use of
this authority, a full report within 30 days
after use of this authority which includes
the number of staff and funding level broken
down by the originating center and number
of days detailed, and an update of such report every 180 days until staff are no longer
on detail without reimbursement to the CDC
Emergency Operations Center.
BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For acquisition of real property, equipment, construction, installation, demolition,
and renovation of facilities, $40,000,000, which
shall remain available until expended: Provided, That funds made available to this account in this or any prior Act that are available for the acquisition of real property or
for construction or improvement of facilities
shall be available to make improvements on

PO 00000

Frm 00044

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

non-federally owned property, provided that
any improvements that are not adjacent to
federally owned property do not exceed
$2,500,000, and that the primary benefit of
such improvements accrues to CDC: Provided
further, That funds previously set-aside by
CDC for repair and upgrade of the Lake Lynn
Experimental Mine and Laboratory shall be
used to acquire a replacement mine safety
research facility: Provided further, That funds
made available to this account in this or any
prior Act that are available for the acquisition of real property or for construction or
improvement of facilities in conjunction
with the new replacement mine safety research facility shall be available to make
improvements on non-federally owned property, provided that any improvements that
are not adjacent to federally owned property
do not exceed $5,000,000: Provided further,
That in addition, the prior year unobligated
balance of any amounts assigned to former
employees in accounts of CDC made available for Individual Learning Accounts shall
be credited to and merged with the amounts
made available under this heading to support
the replacement of the mine safety research
facility.
CDC-WIDE ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAM SUPPORT
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For carrying out titles II, III, XVII and
XIX, and section 2821 of the PHS Act and for
cross-cutting activities and program support
for activities funded in other appropriations
included in this Act for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, $396,570,000:
Provided, That the amounts made available
for Public Health Infrastructure and Capacity appropriations shall remain available
through September 30, 2027: Provided further,
That paragraphs (1) through (3) of subsection
(b) of section 2821 of the PHS Act shall not
apply to funds appropriated under this heading and in all other accounts of the CDC:
Provided further, That the amounts made
available for Infectious Diseases Rapid Response Reserve Fund appropriations shall remain available until expended and shall be
available to the Director of the CDC for deposit in the Infectious Diseases Rapid Response Reserve Fund established by section
231 of division B of Public Law 115–245: Provided further, That funds appropriated under
this heading may be used to support a contract for the operation and maintenance of
an aircraft in direct support of activities
throughout CDC to ensure the agency is prepared to address public health preparedness
emergencies: Provided further, That employees of CDC or the Public Health Service,
both civilian and commissioned officers, detailed to States, municipalities, or other organizations under authority of section 214 of
the PHS Act, or in overseas assignments,
shall be treated as non-Federal employees
for reporting purposes only and shall not be
included within any personnel ceiling applicable to the Agency, Service, or HHS during
the period of detail or assignment: Provided
further, That CDC may use up to $10,000 from
amounts appropriated to CDC in this Act for
official reception and representation expenses when specifically approved by the Director of CDC: Provided further, That in addition, such sums as may be derived from authorized user fees, which shall be credited to
the appropriation charged with the cost
thereof: Provided further, That with respect
to the previous proviso, authorized user fees
from the Vessel Sanitation Program and the
Respirator Certification Program shall be
available through September 30, 2027.
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH
NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to cancer,

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

$7,352,159,000, of which up to $30,000,000 may
be used for facilities repairs and improvements at the National Cancer Institute—
Frederick Federally Funded Research and
Development Center in Frederick, Maryland.
NATIONAL HEART, LUNG, AND BLOOD INSTITUTE
For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to cardiovascular,
lung, and blood diseases, and blood and blood
products, $3,990,345,000.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DENTAL AND
CRANIOFACIAL RESEARCH

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to dental and
craniofacial diseases, $525,163,000.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DIABETES AND
DIGESTIVE AND KIDNEY DISEASES

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to diabetes and digestive and kidney disease, $2,326,721,000.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF NEUROLOGICAL
DISORDERS AND STROKE

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to neurological
disorders and stroke, $2,804,925,000.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND
INFECTIOUS DISEASES

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to allergy and infectious diseases, $6,585,279,000: Provided,
That not less than $270,000,000 is provided for
research to develop universal flu vaccines.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF GENERAL MEDICAL
SCIENCES

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to general medical
sciences, $3,269,679,000, of which $1,427,482,000
shall be from funds available under section
241 of the PHS Act: Provided, That not less
than $450,956,000 is provided for the Institutional Development Awards program.
EUNICE KENNEDY SHRIVER NATIONAL INSTITUTE
OF CHILD HEALTH AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to child health and
human development, $1,769,078,000: Provided,
That not less than $63,400,000 is provided for
the Implementing a Maternal health and
Pregnancy Outcomes Vision for Everyone
(IMPROVE) Initiative.
NATIONAL EYE INSTITUTE

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to eye diseases and
visual disorders, $896,549,000.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ENVIRONMENTAL
HEALTH SCIENCES

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to environmental
health sciences, $913,979,000.

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to mental health,
$2,189,843,000.
NATIONAL HUMAN GENOME RESEARCH INSTITUTE

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to human genome
research, $663,200,000.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF BIOMEDICAL IMAGING
AND BIOENGINEERING

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to biomedical imaging
and
bioengineering
research,
$440,627,000.
NATIONAL CENTER FOR COMPLEMENTARY AND
INTEGRATIVE HEALTH

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to complementary
and integrative health, $170,384,000.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON MINORITY HEALTH AND
HEALTH DISPARITIES

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to minority health
and health disparities research, $538,395,000.
JOHN E. FOGARTY INTERNATIONAL CENTER
For carrying out the activities of the John
E. Fogarty International Center (described
in subpart 2 of part E of title IV of the PHS
Act), $95,162,000.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to health information communications, $497,548,000: Provided,
That of the amounts available for improvement of information systems, $4,000,000 shall
be available until September 30, 2027: Provided further, That in this fiscal year, the National Library of Medicine may enter into
personal services contracts for the provision
of services in facilities owned, operated, or
constructed under the jurisdiction of the National Institutes of Health (referred to in
this title as ‘‘NIH’’).
NATIONAL CENTER FOR ADVANCING
TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCES

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to translational
sciences,
$942,323,000:
Provided,
That
$75,000,000 shall be available to implement
section 480 of the PHS Act, relating to the
Cures Acceleration Network: Provided further, That at least $629,560,000 is provided to
the Clinical and Translational Sciences
Awards program.

NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON AGING

OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ARTHRITIS AND
MUSCULOSKELETAL AND SKIN DISEASES

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to arthritis and
musculoskeletal
and
skin
diseases,
$685,465,000.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON DEAFNESS AND OTHER
COMMUNICATION DISORDERS

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to deafness and
other communication disorders, $534,333,000.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF NURSING RESEARCH
DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON DRUG ABUSE

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to drug abuse,
$1,662,695,000.

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to aging,
$4,517,623,000.

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to nursing research, $197,693,000.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON ALCOHOL ABUSE AND
ALCOHOLISM

For carrying out section 301 and title IV of
the PHS Act with respect to alcohol abuse
and alcoholism, $595,318,000.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1219

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

For carrying out the responsibilities of the
Office of the Director, NIH, $2,462,914,000:
Provided, That funding shall be available for
the purchase of not to exceed 29 passenger
motor vehicles for replacement only: Provided further, That all funds credited to the
NIH Management Fund shall remain available for one fiscal year after the fiscal year
in which they are deposited: Provided further,
That $180,000,000 shall be for the Environmental Influences on Child Health Outcomes
study: Provided further, That $572,401,000 shall
be available for the Common Fund established under section 402A(c)(1) of the PHS
Act: Provided further, That of the funds provided, $10,000 shall be for official reception
and representation expenses when specifically approved by the Director of the NIH:
Provided further, That the Office of AIDS Research within the Office of the Director of
the NIH may spend up to $8,000,000 to make
grants for construction or renovation of facilities as provided for in section 2354(a)(5)(B)

PO 00000

Frm 00045

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

of the PHS Act: Provided further, That
$80,000,000 shall be used to carry out section
404I of the PHS Act (42 U.S.C. 283k), relating
to biomedical and behavioral research facilities: Provided further, That $5,000,000 shall be
transferred to and merged with the appropriation for the ‘‘Office of Inspector General’’ for oversight of grant programs and operations of the NIH, including agency efforts
to ensure the integrity of its grant application evaluation and selection processes, and
shall be in addition to funds otherwise made
available for oversight of the NIH: Provided
further, That amounts made available under
this heading are also available to establish,
operate, and support the Research Policy
Board authorized by section 2034(f) of the
21st Century Cures Act: Provided further,
That not less than $106,480,000 is provided for
the Office of Research on Women’s Health
and such funds shall also be available for
making grants to serve and promote the interests of women in research, and the Director of such Office may, in making such
grants, use the authorities available to NIH
Institutes and Centers.
In addition to other funds appropriated for
the Office of the Director, $12,600,000 is appropriated from the 10-year Pediatric Research Initiative Fund described in section
9008 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26
U.S.C. 9008), for the purpose of carrying out
section 402(b)(7)(B)(ii) of the PHS Act (relating to pediatric research).
BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES

For the study of, construction of, demolition of, renovation of, and acquisition of
equipment for, facilities of or used by NIH,
including the acquisition of real property,
$350,000,000, to remain available until expended.
NIH INNOVATION ACCOUNT, CURES ACT
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses to carry out the
purposes described in section 1001(b)(4) of the
21st Century Cures Act, in addition to
amounts available for such purposes in the
appropriations provided to the NIH in this
Act, $226,000,000, to remain available until
expended: Provided, That such amounts are
appropriated pursuant to section 1001(b)(3) of
such Act, are to be derived from amounts
transferred under section 1001(b)(2)(A) of
such Act, and may be transferred by the Director of the NIH to other accounts of the
NIH solely for the purposes provided in such
Act: Provided further, That upon a determination by the Director of the NIH that funds
transferred pursuant to the previous proviso
are not necessary for the purposes provided,
such amounts may be transferred back to
the Account: Provided further, That the
transfer authority provided under this heading is in addition to any other transfer authority provided by law.
ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY FOR
HEALTH

For carrying out section 301 and part J of
title IV of the PHS Act with respect to advanced
research
projects
for
health,
$1,500,000,000, to remain available through
September 30, 2028.
SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND MENTAL HEALTH
SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
MENTAL HEALTH

For carrying out titles III, V, and XIX of
the PHS Act with respect to mental health,
the Protection and Advocacy for Individuals
with Mental Illness Act, and the SUPPORT
for
Patients
and
Communities
Act,
$2,790,407,000: Provided, That of the funds
made
available
under
this
heading,
$100,887,000 shall be for the National Child
Traumatic Stress Initiative: Provided further,
That of the funds made available under this

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1220

heading, $991,532,000 shall be for the Mental
Health Block Grant: Provided further, That of
the funds made available under this heading,
$132,000,000 shall be for Children’s Mental
Health Services: Provided further, That of the
funds made available under this heading,
$66,635,000 shall be for Projects for Assistance
in Transition from Homelessness: Provided
further, That of the funds made available
under this heading, $40,000,000 shall be for
Protection and Advocacy for Individuals
with Mental Illness: Provided further, That
notwithstanding section 520A(f)(2) of the
PHS Act, no funds appropriated for carrying
out section 520A shall be available for carrying out section 1971 of the PHS Act: Provided further, That in addition to amounts
provided herein, $21,039,000 shall be available
under section 241 of the PHS Act to carry out
subpart I of part B of title XIX of the PHS
Act to fund section 1920(b) technical assistance, national data, data collection and evaluation activities, and further that the total
available under this Act for section 1920(b)
activities shall not exceed 5 percent of the
amounts appropriated for subpart I of part B
of title XIX: Provided further, That of the
funds made available under this heading for
subpart I of part B of title XIX of the PHS
Act, at least 5 percent shall be available to
support evidence-based crisis systems: Provided further, That up to 10 percent of the
amounts made available to carry out the
Children’s Mental Health Services program
may be used to carry out demonstration
grants or contracts for early interventions
with persons not more than 25 years of age at
clinical high risk of developing a first episode of psychosis: Provided further, That section 520E(b)(2) of the PHS Act shall not
apply to funds appropriated in this Act for
fiscal year 2026: Provided further, That
$385,500,000 shall be available until September 30, 2028 for grants to communities
and community organizations who meet criteria for Certified Community Behavioral
Health Clinics pursuant to section 223(a) of
Public Law 113–93: Provided further, That
none of the funds provided for section 1911 of
the PHS Act shall be subject to section 241 of
such Act: Provided further, That the budget
activities specified in the table under this
heading in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act) shall be
funded in the amounts specified as appropriations in such table: Provided further,
That amounts made available for 988 Lifeline
appropriations shall be for the purposes described in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act): Provided
further, That of the funds made available
under this heading, $21,420,000 shall be to
carry out section 224 of the Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014 (Public Law 113–
93; 42 U.S.C. 290aa 22 note).

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT

For carrying out titles III and V of the
PHS Act with respect to substance abuse
treatment and title XIX of such Act with respect to substance abuse treatment and prevention, section 1003 of the 21st Century
Cures Act, and the SUPPORT for Patients
and Communities Act, $4,091,098,000: Provided, That $1,595,000,000 shall be for carrying
out section 1003 of the 21st Century Cures
Act: Provided further, That of such amount in
the preceding proviso not less than 4.25 percent shall be made available to Indian Tribes
or Tribal organizations: Provided further,
That in addition to amounts provided herein,
the following amounts shall be available
under section 241 of the PHS Act: (1)
$79,200,000 to carry out subpart II of part B of
title XIX of the PHS Act to fund section
1935(b) technical assistance, national data,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

data collection and evaluation activities,
and further that the total available under
this Act for section 1935(b) activities shall
not exceed 5 percent of the amounts appropriated for subpart II of part B of title XIX;
and (2) $2,000,000 to evaluate substance abuse
treatment programs: Provided further, That
$562,219,000 shall be for programs of regional
and national significance, which shall be for
the purposes and in the amounts specified in
the table under this heading in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the
matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act), other than amounts specified in
such table as PHS Evaluation Funds: Provided further, That none of the funds provided
for section 1921 of the PHS Act or State
Opioid Response Grants shall be subject to
section 241 of such Act.
SUBSTANCE ABUSE PREVENTION

For carrying out titles III and V of the
PHS Act with respect to substance abuse
prevention, $240,879,000, which shall be for
the purposes and in the amounts specified in
the table under this heading in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the
matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act).
HEALTH SURVEILLANCE AND PROGRAM SUPPORT

For program support and cross-cutting activities that supplement activities funded
under the headings ‘‘Mental Health’’, ‘‘Substance Abuse Treatment’’, and ‘‘Substance
Abuse Prevention’’ in carrying out titles III,
V, and XIX of the PHS Act and the Protection and Advocacy for Individuals with Mental Illness Act in the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration,
$171,566,000: Provided, That of the amount
made available under this heading, $54,311,000
shall be used for the projects, and in the
amounts, specified in the table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included for this division
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act): Provided further,
That none of the funds made available for
projects described in the preceding proviso
shall be subject to section 241 of the PHS Act
or section 205 of this Act: Provided further,
That in addition to amounts provided herein,
$31,428,000 shall be available under section
241 of the PHS Act to supplement funds
available to carry out national surveys on
drug abuse and mental health, to collect and
analyze program data, and to conduct public
awareness and technical assistance activities: Provided further, That, in addition, fees
may be collected for the costs of publications, data, data tabulations, and data analysis completed under title V of the PHS Act
and provided to a public or private entity
upon request, which shall be credited to this
appropriation and shall remain available
until expended for such purposes: Provided
further, That amounts made available in this
Act for carrying out section 501(o) of the
PHS Act shall remain available through September 30, 2027: Provided further, That funds
made available under this heading (other
than amounts specified in the first proviso
under this heading) may be used to supplement program support funding provided
under the headings ‘‘Mental Health’’, ‘‘Substance Abuse Treatment’’, and ‘‘Substance
Abuse Prevention’’.
AGENCY FOR HEALTHCARE RESEARCH AND
QUALITY
HEALTHCARE RESEARCH AND QUALITY

For carrying out titles III and IX of the
PHS Act, part A of title XI of the Social Security Act, and section 1013 of the Medicare
Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003, $345,380,000: Provided,
That section 947(c) of the PHS Act shall not

PO 00000

Frm 00046

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

apply in fiscal year 2026: Provided further,
That in addition, amounts received from
Freedom of Information Act fees, reimbursable and interagency agreements, and the
sale of data shall be credited to this appropriation and shall remain available until
September 30, 2027.
CENTERS FOR MEDICARE & MEDICAID SERVICES
GRANTS TO STATES FOR MEDICAID

For carrying out, except as otherwise provided, titles XI and XIX of the Social Security Act, $508,148,791,000, to remain available
until expended.
In addition, for carrying out such titles
after May 31, 2026, for the last quarter of fiscal year 2026 for unanticipated costs incurred
for the current fiscal year, such sums as may
be necessary, to remain available until expended.
In addition, for carrying out such titles for
the first quarter of fiscal year 2027,
$316,514,725,000, to remain available until expended.
Payment under such title XIX may be
made for any quarter with respect to a State
plan or plan amendment in effect during
such quarter, if submitted in or prior to such
quarter and approved in that or any subsequent quarter.
PAYMENTS TO THE HEALTH CARE TRUST FUNDS

For payment to the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund, as
provided under sections 217(g), 1844, and
1860D–16 of the Social Security Act, sections
103(c) and 111(d) of the Social Security
Amendments of 1965, section 278(d)(3) of Public Law 97–248, and for administrative expenses incurred pursuant to section 201(g) of
the Social Security Act, $593,817,000,000.
In addition, for making matching payments under section 1844 and benefit payments under section 1860D–16 of the Social
Security Act that were not anticipated in
budget estimates, such sums as may be necessary.
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT

For carrying out, except as otherwise provided, titles XI, XVIII, XIX, and XXI of the
Social Security Act, titles XIII and XXVII of
the PHS Act, the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988, and other
responsibilities of the Centers for Medicare
& Medicaid Services, not to exceed
$3,669,744,000 to be transferred from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the
Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance
Trust Fund, as authorized by section 201(g)
of the Social Security Act; together with all
funds collected in accordance with section
353 of the PHS Act and section 1857(e)(2) of
the Social Security Act, funds retained by
the Secretary pursuant to section 1893(h) of
the Social Security Act, and such sums as
may be collected from authorized user fees
and the sale of data, which shall be credited
to this account and remain available until
expended: Provided, That all funds derived in
accordance with 31 U.S.C. 9701 from organizations established under title XIII of the PHS
Act shall be credited to and available for
carrying out the purposes of this appropriation: Provided further, That the Secretary is
directed to collect fees in fiscal year 2026
from Medicare Advantage organizations pursuant to section 1857(e)(2) of the Social Security Act and from eligible organizations with
risk-sharing contracts under section 1876 of
that Act pursuant to section 1876(k)(4)(D) of
that Act: Provided further, That of the
amount made available under this heading,
$397,334,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027, and shall be available for the
Survey and Certification Program: Provided
further, That amounts available under this
heading to support quality improvement organizations (as defined in section 1152 of the

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

Social Security Act) shall not exceed the
amount specifically provided for such purpose under this heading in division H of the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2018 (Public Law 115–141).
HEALTH CARE FRAUD AND ABUSE CONTROL
ACCOUNT

In addition to amounts otherwise available
for program integrity and program management, $941,000,000, to remain available
through September 30, 2027, to be transferred
from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust
Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund, as authorized by
section 201(g) of the Social Security Act, of
which $699,058,000 shall be for the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services program integrity activities, of which $108,735,000 shall
be for the Department of Health and Human
Services Office of Inspector General to carry
out fraud and abuse activities authorized by
section 1817(k)(3) of such Act, and of which
$133,207,000 shall be for the Department of
Justice to carry out fraud and abuse activities authorized by section 1817(k)(3) of such
Act: Provided, That the report required by
section 1817(k)(5) of the Social Security Act
for fiscal year 2026 shall include measures of
the operational efficiency and impact on
fraud, waste, and abuse in the Medicare,
Medicaid, and CHIP programs for the funds
provided by this appropriation: Provided further, That of the amount provided under this
heading, $311,000,000 is provided to meet the
terms of a concurrent resolution on the
budget, and $630,000,000 is additional new
budget authority specified for purposes of a
concurrent resolution on the budget for additional health care fraud and abuse control
activities: Provided further, That the Secretary shall provide not less than $35,000,000
from amounts made available under this
heading and amounts made available for fiscal year 2026 under section 1817(k)(3)(A) of
the Social Security Act for the Senior Medicare Patrol program to combat health care
fraud and abuse.
ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES
PAYMENTS TO STATES FOR CHILD SUPPORT
ENFORCEMENT AND FAMILY SUPPORT PROGRAMS

For carrying out, except as otherwise provided, titles I, IV–D, X, XI, XIV, and XVI of
the Social Security Act and the Act of July
5, 1960, $4,147,000,000, to remain available
until expended; and for such purposes for the
first quarter of fiscal year 2027, $1,800,000,000,
to remain available until expended.
For carrying out, after May 31 of the current fiscal year, except as otherwise provided, titles I, IV–D, X, XI, XIV, and XVI of
the Social Security Act and the Act of July
5, 1960, for the last 3 months of the current
fiscal year for unanticipated costs, incurred
for the current fiscal year, such sums as may
be necessary.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

LOW INCOME HOME ENERGY ASSISTANCE

For making payments under subsections
(b) and (d) of section 2602 of the Low-Income
Home Energy Assistance Act of 1981 (42
U.S.C. 8621 et seq.), $4,045,000,000: Provided,
That notwithstanding section 2609A(a) of
such Act, not more than $9,600,000 may be reserved by the Secretary for technical assistance, training, and monitoring of program
activities for compliance with internal controls, policies and procedures, and to supplement funding otherwise available for necessary administrative expenses to carry out
such Act, and the Secretary may, in addition
to the authorities provided in section
2609A(a)(1), use such funds through contracts
with private entities that do not qualify as
nonprofit organizations: Provided further,
That all but $907,348,000 of the amount appropriated under this heading shall be allocated
as though the total appropriation for such

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1221

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

payments for fiscal year 2026 was less than
$1,975,000,000: Provided further, That, after applying all applicable provisions of section
2604 of such Act and the previous proviso,
each State or territory that would otherwise
receive an allocation that is less than 97 percent of the amount that it received under
this heading for fiscal year 2025 from
amounts appropriated pursuant to section
1101(a)(8) of division A of Public Law 119–4
shall have its allocation increased to that 97
percent level, with the portions of other
States’ and territories’ allocations that
would exceed 100 percent of the amounts
they respectively received in such fashion
for fiscal year 2025 being ratably reduced:
Provided further, That by November 1 of the
current year, the Secretary shall award to
each State no less than 90 percent of its total
allotment, as calculated pursuant to the preceding two provisos.
REFUGEE AND ENTRANT ASSISTANCE
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses for refugee and entrant assistance activities authorized by section 414 of the Immigration and Nationality
Act and section 501 of the Refugee Education
Assistance Act of 1980, and for carrying out
section 462 of the Homeland Security Act of
2002, section 235 of the William Wilberforce
Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008, the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 (‘‘TVPA’’), and the Torture Victims Relief Act of 1998, $5,163,956,000,
of which $5,114,201,000 shall remain available
through September 30, 2028 for carrying out
such sections 414, 501, 462, and 235: Provided,
That amounts available under this heading
to carry out the TVPA shall also be available for research and evaluation with respect
to activities under such Act: Provided further,
That the limitation in section 205 of this Act
regarding transfers increasing any appropriation shall apply to transfers to appropriations under this heading by substituting
‘‘15 percent’’ for ‘‘3 percent’’: Provided further, That the contribution of funds requirement under section 235(c)(6)(C)(iii) of the
William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims
Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008 shall
not apply to funds made available under this
heading: Provided further, That for any
month in fiscal year 2026 that the number of
unaccompanied children referred to the Department of Health and Human Services pursuant to section 462 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 and section 235 of the William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008 exceeds
16,000, as determined by the Secretary of
Health and Human Services, an additional
$15,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, shall be made available for
obligation for every 500 unaccompanied children above that level (including a pro rata
amount for any increment less than 500), for
carrying out such sections 462 and 235.
PAYMENTS TO STATES FOR THE CHILD CARE AND
DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT

For carrying out the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (‘‘CCDBG
Act’’), $8,831,387,000 shall be used to supplement, not supplant State general revenue
funds for child care assistance for low-income families: Provided, That technical assistance under section 658I(a)(3) of such Act
may be provided directly, or through the use
of contracts, grants, cooperative agreements,
or interagency agreements: Provided further,
That all funds made available to carry out
section 418 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 618), including funds appropriated for
that purpose in such section 418 or any other
provision of law, shall be subject to the reservation of funds authority in paragraphs (4)
and (5) of section 658O(a) of the CCDBG Act:

PO 00000

Frm 00047

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Provided further, That notwithstanding the
limitation in subparagraph (B) of section
658O(a)(2) of such Act, of the amounts appropriated under this heading, not less than 5
percent shall be reserved under subparagraph
(A) of such section for payments to Indian
Tribes and Tribal organizations: Provided further, That of the amounts made available
under this heading, the Secretary may reserve up to 0.5 percent for Federal administrative expenses: Provided further, That the
Secretary shall award to each State its allotted amount no less than quarterly.
SOCIAL SERVICES BLOCK GRANT

For making grants to States pursuant to
section 2002 of the Social Security Act,
$1,700,000,000: Provided, That notwithstanding
subparagraph (B) of section 404(d)(2) of such
Act, the applicable percent specified under
such subparagraph for a State to carry out
State programs pursuant to title XX–A of
such Act shall be 10 percent.
CHILDREN AND FAMILIES SERVICES PROGRAMS

For carrying out, except as otherwise provided, the Runaway and Homeless Youth
Act, the Head Start Act, the Every Student
Succeeds Act, the Child Abuse Prevention
and Treatment Act, sections 303 and 313 of
the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act, the Native American Programs Act
of 1974, title II of the Child Abuse Prevention
and Treatment and Adoption Reform Act of
1978 (adoption opportunities), part B–1 of
title IV and sections 429, 473A, 477(i), 1110,
1114A, and 1115 of the Social Security Act,
and the Community Services Block Grant
Act (‘‘CSBG Act’’); and for necessary administrative expenses to carry out titles I, IV, V,
X, XI, XIV, XVI, and XX–A of the Social Security Act, the Act of July 5, 1960, and the
Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Act of
1981, $14,923,390,000, of which $75,000,000, to remain available through September 30, 2027,
shall be for grants to States for adoption and
legal guardianship incentive payments, as
defined by section 473A of the Social Security Act and may be made for adoptions and
legal guardianships completed before September 30, 2026: Provided, That $12,356,820,000
shall be for making payments under the
Head Start Act, including for Early Head
Start–Child Care Partnerships, and, of
which, notwithstanding section 640 of such
Act:
(1) $75,000,000 shall be available for a cost of
living adjustment, and with respect to any
continuing appropriations act, funding available for a cost of living adjustment shall not
be construed as an authority or condition
under this Act;
(2) $25,000,000 shall be available for allocation by the Secretary to supplement activities described in paragraphs (7)(B) and (9) of
section 641(c) of the Head Start Act under
the Designation Renewal System, established under the authority of sections
641(c)(7), 645A(b)(12), and 645A(d) of such Act,
and such funds shall not be included in the
calculation of ‘‘base grant’’ in subsequent
fiscal years, as such term is used in section
640(a)(7)(A) of such Act;
(3) $10,000,000 shall be available for the
Tribal Colleges and Universities Head Start
Partnership Program consistent with section
648(g) of such Act;
(4) Not to exceed $8,000,000 shall be available until September 30, 2027 for the Marshall Islands and Micronesia for the start-up
and operation of Head Start services and for
the provision of training and technical assistance: Provided, That an agency awarded
these funds shall not be subject to the requirements of the system for designation renewal as defined by section 641 of the Head
Start Act, for this award only, prior to 24
months after the date of such award; and

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1222

(5) $21,000,000 shall be available to supplement funding otherwise available for research, evaluation, and Federal administrative costs:
Provided further, That the Secretary may reduce the reservation of funds under section
640(a)(2)(C) of such Act in lieu of reducing
the reservation of funds under sections
640(a)(2)(B), 640(a)(2)(D), and 640(a)(2)(E) of
such Act: Provided further, That the Secretary shall award funding for continuation
awards and new award cycles that continue
previous activities under existing awards no
later than the day following the expiration
of the period of performance: Provided further, That $315,000,000 shall be available until
December 31, 2026 for carrying out sections
9212 and 9213 of the Every Student Succeeds
Act: Provided further, That up to 3 percent of
the funds in the preceding proviso shall be
available for technical assistance and evaluation related to grants awarded under such
section
9212:
Provided
further,
That
$810,383,000 shall be for making payments
under the CSBG Act: Provided further, That
for services furnished under the CSBG Act
with funds made available for such purpose
in this fiscal year and in fiscal year 2025,
States may apply the last sentence of section 673(2) of the CSBG Act by substituting
‘‘200 percent’’ for ‘‘125 percent’’: Provided further, That $35,383,000 shall be for section 680
of the CSBG Act, of which not less than
$22,383,000 shall be for section 680(a)(2) and
not less than $13,000,000 shall be for section
680(a)(3)(B) of such Act: Provided further,
That, notwithstanding section 675C(a)(3) of
the CSBG Act, to the extent Community
Services Block Grant funds are distributed
as grant funds by a State to an eligible entity as provided under such Act, and have not
been expended by such entity, they shall remain with such entity for carryover into the
next fiscal year for expenditure by such entity consistent with program purposes: Provided further, That the Secretary shall establish procedures regarding the disposition of
intangible assets and program income that
permit such assets acquired with, and program income derived from, grant funds authorized under section 680 of the CSBG Act
to become the sole property of such grantees
after a period of not more than 12 years after
the end of the grant period for any activity
consistent with section 680(a)(2)(A) of the
CSBG Act: Provided further, That intangible
assets in the form of loans, equity investments and other debt instruments, and program income may be used by grantees for
any eligible purpose consistent with section
680(a)(2)(A) of the CSBG Act: Provided further, That these procedures shall apply to
such grant funds made available after November 29, 1999: Provided further, That funds
appropriated for section 680(a)(2) of the
CSBG Act shall be available for financing
construction and rehabilitation and loans or
investments in private business enterprises
owned by community development corporations: Provided further, That $245,000,000 shall
be for carrying out section 303(a) of the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act, of
which $9,500,000 shall be allocated notwithstanding section 303(a)(2) of such Act for carrying out section 309 of such Act: Provided
further, That the percentages specified in
section 112(a)(2) of the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act shall not apply to
funds appropriated under this heading: Provided further, That $1,864,000 shall be for a
human services case management system for
federally declared disasters, to include a
comprehensive national case management
contract and Federal costs of administering
the system: Provided further, That up to
$2,000,000 shall be for improving the Public
Assistance Reporting Information System,
including grants to States to support data

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

collection for a study of the system’s effectiveness: Provided further, That $40,801,000
shall be used for the projects, and in the
amounts, specified in the table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included for this division
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act): Provided further,
That none of the funds made available for
projects described in the preceding proviso
shall be subject to section 241 of the PHS Act
or section 205 of this Act: Provided further,
That $34,512,000 shall be for the purposes and
in the amounts specified in the table under
this heading in the explanatory statement
described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act).
PROMOTING SAFE AND STABLE FAMILIES

For carrying out, except as otherwise provided, section 436 of the Social Security Act,
$420,000,000 and, for carrying out, except as
otherwise provided, section 437 of such Act,
$62,515,000: Provided, That of the funds available to carry out section 437, $59,765,000 shall
be allocated consistent with subsections (b)
through (d) of such section: Provided further,
That of the funds available to carry out section 437, $2,750,000, in addition to funds otherwise appropriated in section 476 for such purposes, shall be for the Family First Clearinghouse and to support evaluation and technical assistance relating to the evaluation of
child and family services: Provided further,
That notwithstanding section 436(b)(1), such
reserved amounts in the preceding proviso
may be used for identifying, establishing,
and disseminating practices to meet the criteria specified in section 471(e)(4)(C).
PAYMENTS FOR FOSTER CARE AND PERMANENCY

For carrying out, except as otherwise provided, title IV–E of the Social Security Act,
$6,843,000,000.
For carrying out, except as otherwise provided, title IV–E of the Social Security Act,
for the first quarter of fiscal year 2027,
$3,800,000,000.
For carrying out, after May 31 of the current fiscal year, except as otherwise provided, section 474 of title IV–E of the Social
Security Act, for the last 3 months of the
current fiscal year for unanticipated costs,
incurred for the current fiscal year, such
sums as may be necessary.
ADMINISTRATION FOR COMMUNITY LIVING
AGING AND DISABILITY SERVICES PROGRAMS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For carrying out, to the extent not otherwise provided, the Older Americans Act of
1965 (‘‘OAA’’), the RAISE Family Caregivers
Act, the Supporting Grandparents Raising
Grandchildren Act, titles III and XXIX of the
PHS Act, sections 1252 and 1253 of the PHS
Act, section 119 of the Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008,
title XX–B of the Social Security Act, the
Developmental Disabilities Assistance and
Bill of Rights Act of 2000, parts 2 and 5 of
subtitle D of title II of the Help America
Vote Act of 2002, the Assistive Technology
Act of 1998, titles II and VII (and section 14
with respect to such titles) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and for Department-wide coordination of policy and program activities
that assist individuals with disabilities,
$2,453,737,000, together with $55,242,000 to be
transferred from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund to
carry out section 4360 of the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1990: Provided, That of
amounts made available under this heading
to carry out sections 311, 331, and 336 of the
OAA, up to one percent of such amounts
shall be available for developing and implementing evidence-based practices for en-

PO 00000

Frm 00048

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

hancing senior nutrition, including medically-tailored meals: Provided further, That
notwithstanding any other provision of this
Act, funds made available under this heading
to carry out section 311 of the OAA may be
transferred to the Secretary of Agriculture
in accordance with such section: Provided
further, That up to 5 percent of the funds provided for adult protective services grants
under section 2042 of title XX of the Social
Security Act may be used to make grants to
Tribes and Tribal organizations: Provided further, That $2,000,000 shall be for competitive
grants to support alternative financing programs that provide for the purchase of assistive technology devices, such as a low-interest loan fund; an interest buy-down program; a revolving loan fund; a loan guarantee; or an insurance program: Provided further, That applicants shall provide an assurance that, and information describing the
manner in which, the alternative financing
program will expand and emphasize consumer choice and control: Provided further,
That State agencies and community-based
disability organizations that are directed by
and operated for individuals with disabilities
shall be eligible to compete: Provided further,
That none of the funds made available under
this heading may be used by an eligible system (as defined in section 102 of the Protection and Advocacy for Individuals with Mental Illness Act (42 U.S.C. 10802)) to continue
to pursue any legal action in a Federal or
State court on behalf of an individual or
group of individuals with a developmental
disability (as defined in section 102(8)(A) of
the Developmental Disabilities and Assistance and Bill of Rights Act of 2000 (20 U.S.C.
15002(8)(A)) that is attributable to a mental
impairment (or a combination of mental and
physical impairments), that has as the requested remedy the closure of State operated
intermediate care facilities for people with
intellectual or developmental disabilities,
unless reasonable public notice of the action
has been provided to such individuals (or, in
the case of mental incapacitation, the legal
guardians who have been specifically awarded authority by the courts to make
healthcare and residential decisions on behalf of such individuals) who are affected by
such action, within 90 days of instituting
such legal action, which informs such individuals (or such legal guardians) of their
legal rights and how to exercise such rights
consistent with current Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure: Provided further, That the
limitations in the immediately preceding
proviso shall not apply in the case of an individual who is neither competent to consent
nor has a legal guardian, nor shall the proviso apply in the case of individuals who are
a ward of the State or subject to public
guardianship: Provided further, That of the
amount made available under this heading,
$13,968,000 shall be used for the projects, and
in the amounts, specified in the table titled
‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act): Provided
further, That none of the funds made available for projects described in the preceding
proviso shall be subject to section 241 of the
PHS Act or section 205 of this Act.
ADMINISTRATION FOR STRATEGIC
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND PROCUREMENT
For carrying out title III and subtitles A
and B of title XXVIII of the PHS Act, with
respect to the research, development, storage, production, and procurement of medical
countermeasures to counter potential chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear
threats to civilian populations, $3,207,991,000:
Provided, That of such amount:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

(1) $1,050,000,000, to remain available
through September 30, 2027, shall be for expenses necessary to support advanced research and development pursuant to section
319L of the PHS Act and other administrative expenses of the Biomedical Advanced
Research and Development Authority;
(2) $850,000,000, to remain available until
expended, shall be for expenses necessary for
procuring security countermeasures (as defined in section 319F–2(c)(1)(B) of the PHS
Act);
(3) $1,000,000,000, to remain available until
expended, shall be for expenses necessary to
carry out section 319F–2(a) of the PHS Act;
and
(4) $307,991,000 shall be for expenses necessary to prepare for or respond to an influenza pandemic, of which $280,000,000 shall remain available until expended for activities
including the development and purchase of
vaccines, antivirals, necessary medical supplies, diagnostics, and surveillance tools:
Provided, That notwithstanding section
496(b) of the PHS Act, funds allocated under
this paragraph may be used for the construction or renovation of privately owned facilities for the production of pandemic influenza
vaccines and other biologics, if the Secretary
finds such construction or renovation necessary to secure sufficient supplies of such
vaccines or biologics:
Provided further, That funds provided under
this heading for purposes of acquisition of security countermeasures shall be in addition
to any other funds made available for such
purposes: Provided further, That products
purchased with funds made available under
this heading may, at the discretion of the
Secretary, be deposited in the Strategic National Stockpile pursuant to section 319F–2
of the PHS Act.
OPERATIONS, PREPAREDNESS, AND EMERGENCY
RESPONSE

For carrying out titles III, XII, and subtitles A and B of title XXVIII of the PHS
Act, operations and emergency response activities related to countering potential
chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear threats and other public health emergencies, $484,606,000: Provided, That of the
amounts made available under this heading,
$5,000,000 shall remain available through September 30, 2028, to support emergency operations: Provided further, That of the amounts
made available under this heading, $10,000,000
shall remain available until September 30,
2027, for advanced research and development,
manufacturing, production, procurement,
distribution, and the acquisition, construction, alteration, or renovation of non-federally owned facilities for the production and
purchase of medical countermeasures, which
may include the development, translation,
and demonstration at scale of innovations in
manufacturing platform.
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

GENERAL DEPARTMENTAL MANAGEMENT

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided, for general departmental management, including hire of six passenger motor
vehicles, and for carrying out titles III,
XVII, XXI, and section 229 of the PHS Act,
the United States-Mexico Border Health
Commission Act, research studies under section 1110 of the Social Security Act, and for
protection services for the Secretary,
$509,144,000, together with $64,828,000 from the
amounts available under section 241 of the
PHS Act to carry out national health or
human services research and evaluation activities: Provided, That of this amount,
$56,000,000 shall be for minority AIDS prevention and treatment activities: Provided further, That of the funds made available under
this heading, $101,000,000 shall be for making

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1223

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

competitive contracts and grants to public
and private entities to fund medically accurate and age appropriate programs that reduce teen pregnancy and for the Federal
costs associated with administering and
evaluating such contracts and grants, of
which not more than 10 percent of the available funds shall be for training and technical
assistance, evaluation, outreach, and additional program support activities, and of the
remaining amount 75 percent shall be for
replicating programs that have been proven
effective through rigorous evaluation to reduce teenage pregnancy, behavioral risk factors underlying teenage pregnancy, or other
associated risk factors, and 25 percent shall
be available for research and demonstration
grants to develop, replicate, refine, and test
additional models and innovative strategies
for preventing teenage pregnancy: Provided
further, That of the amounts provided under
this heading from amounts available under
section 241 of the PHS Act, $6,800,000 shall be
available to carry out evaluations (including
longitudinal evaluations) of teenage pregnancy prevention approaches: Provided further, That of the funds made available under
this heading, $35,000,000 shall be for making
competitive grants which exclusively implement education in sexual risk avoidance (defined as voluntarily refraining from nonmarital sexual activity): Provided further,
That funding for such competitive grants for
sexual risk avoidance shall use medically accurate information referenced to peer-reviewed publications by educational, scientific, governmental, or health organizations; implement an evidence-based approach
integrating research findings with practical
implementation that aligns with the needs
and desired outcomes for the intended audience; and teach the benefits associated with
self-regulation, success sequencing for poverty prevention, healthy relationships, goal
setting, and resisting sexual coercion, dating
violence, and other youth risk behaviors
such as underage drinking or illicit drug use
without normalizing teen sexual activity:
Provided further, That no more than 10 percent of the funding for such competitive
grants for sexual risk avoidance shall be
available for technical assistance and administrative costs of such programs: Provided
further, That funds provided in this Act for
embryo adoption activities may be used to
provide to individuals adopting embryos,
through grants and other mechanisms, medical and administrative services deemed necessary for such adoptions: Provided further,
That such services shall be provided consistent with 42 CFR 59.5(a)(4): Provided further, That of the funds made available under
this heading, $5,000,000 shall be for carrying
out prize competitions sponsored by the Office of the Secretary to accelerate innovation in the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of kidney diseases (as authorized by
section 24 of the Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (15 U.S.C.
3719)).
In addition, for expenses necessary to
carry out title II of the PHS Act to support,
except as otherwise provided, activities related to safeguarding classified national security information and providing intelligence and national security support across
the Department and to counter cybersecurity
threats
to
civilian
populations,
$108,983,000.
In addition, for expenses necessary to prevent, prepare for, or respond to an influenza
pandemic, $7,009,000.
MEDICARE HEARINGS AND APPEALS

For expenses necessary for Medicare hearings and appeals in the Office of the Secretary, $186,155,000 shall remain available
until September 30, 2027, to be transferred in

PO 00000

Frm 00049

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

appropriate part from the Federal Hospital
Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund.
OFFICE OF THE NATIONAL COORDINATOR FOR
HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

For expenses necessary for the Office of the
National Coordinator for Health Information
Technology, including grants, contracts, and
cooperative agreements for the development
and advancement of interoperable health information technology, $69,238,000, of which
$35,863,000 shall be from amounts made available under section 241 of the PHS Act.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

For expenses necessary for the Office of Inspector General, including the hire of passenger motor vehicles for investigations, in
carrying out the provisions of the Inspector
General Act of 1978, $87,000,000: Provided,
That of such amount, necessary sums shall
be available for investigating non-payment
of child support cases for which non-payment
is a Federal offense under 18 U.S.C. 228: Provided further, That of the amount appropriated under this heading, necessary sums
shall be available for carrying out activities
authorized under section 3022 of the PHS Act
(42 U.S.C. 300jj–52).
OFFICE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS

For expenses necessary for the Office for
Civil Rights, $39,798,000.
RETIREMENT PAY AND MEDICAL BENEFITS FOR
COMMISSIONED OFFICERS

For retirement pay and medical benefits of
Public Health Service Commissioned Officers
as authorized by law, for payments under the
Retired Serviceman’s Family Protection
Plan and Survivor Benefit Plan, and for medical care of dependents and retired personnel
under the Dependents’ Medical Care Act,
such amounts as may be required during the
current fiscal year.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 201. Funds appropriated in this title
shall be available for not to exceed $50,000 for
official reception and representation expenses when specifically approved by the
Secretary.
SEC. 202. None of the funds appropriated in
this title shall be used to pay the salary of
an individual, through a grant or other extramural mechanism, at a rate in excess of
Executive Level II: Provided, That none of
the funds appropriated in this title shall be
used to prevent the NIH from paying up to
100 percent of the salary of an individual at
this rate.
SEC. 203. None of the funds appropriated in
this or any other Act may be expended pursuant to section 241 of the PHS Act, except
for funds specifically provided for in this
Act, or for other taps and assessments made
by any office located in HHS, prior to the
preparation and submission of a report by
the Secretary to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate detailing the planned uses of
such funds.
SEC. 204. Notwithstanding section 241(a) of
the PHS Act, such portion as the Secretary
shall determine, but not more than 2.5 percent, of any amounts appropriated for programs authorized under such Act shall be
made available for the evaluation (directly,
or by grants or contracts) and the implementation and effectiveness of programs funded
in this title.
(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 205. Not to exceed 1 percent of any discretionary funds (pursuant to the Balanced
Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act
of 1985) which are appropriated for the current fiscal year for HHS in this Act may be
transferred between appropriations, but no
such appropriation shall be increased by

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1224

more than 3 percent by any such transfer:
Provided, That the transfer authority granted by this section shall not be used to create
any new program or to fund any project or
activity for which no funds are provided in
this Act: Provided further, That the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate are notified at
least 15 days in advance of any transfer.
SEC. 206. In lieu of the timeframe specified
in section 338E(c)(2) of the PHS Act, terminations described in such section may occur
up to 60 days after the effective date of a
contract awarded in fiscal year 2026 under
section 338B of such Act, or at any time if
the individual who has been awarded such
contract has not received funds due under
the contract.
SEC. 207. None of the funds appropriated in
this Act may be made available to any entity under title X of the PHS Act unless the
applicant for the award certifies to the Secretary that it encourages family participation in the decision of minors to seek family
planning services and that it provides counseling to minors on how to resist attempts to
coerce minors into engaging in sexual activities.
SEC. 208. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no provider of services under
title X of the PHS Act shall be exempt from
any State law requiring notification or the
reporting of child abuse, child molestation,
sexual abuse, rape, or incest.
SEC. 209. None of the funds appropriated by
this Act (including funds appropriated to any
trust fund) may be used to carry out the
Medicare Advantage program if the Secretary denies participation in such program
to an otherwise eligible entity (including a
Provider Sponsored Organization) because
the entity informs the Secretary that it will
not provide, pay for, provide coverage of, or
provide referrals for abortions: Provided,
That the Secretary shall make appropriate
prospective adjustments to the capitation
payment to such an entity (based on an actuarially sound estimate of the expected costs
of providing the service to such entity’s enrollees): Provided further, That nothing in
this section shall be construed to change the
Medicare program’s coverage for such services and a Medicare Advantage organization
described in this section shall be responsible
for informing enrollees where to obtain information about all Medicare covered services.
SEC. 210. None of the funds made available
in this title may be used, in whole or in part,
to advocate or promote gun control.
SEC. 211. The Secretary shall make available through assignment not more than 60
employees of the Public Health Service to
assist in child survival activities and to
work in AIDS programs through and with
funds provided by the Agency for International Development, the United Nations
International Children’s Emergency Fund or
the World Health Organization.
SEC. 212. In order for HHS to carry out
international health activities, including
HIV/AIDS and other infectious disease,
chronic and environmental disease, and
other health activities abroad during fiscal
year 2026:
(1) The Secretary may exercise authority
equivalent to that available to the Secretary
of State in section 2(c) of the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956. The Secretary shall consult with the Secretary of
State and relevant Chief of Mission to ensure
that the authority provided in this section is
exercised in a manner consistent with section 207 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980
and other applicable statutes administered
by the Department of State.
(2) The Secretary is authorized to provide
such funds by advance or reimbursement to

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

the Secretary of State as may be necessary
to pay the costs of acquisition, lease, alteration, renovation, and management of facilities outside of the United States for the use
of HHS. The Department of State shall cooperate fully with the Secretary to ensure
that HHS has secure, safe, functional facilities that comply with applicable regulation
governing location, setback, and other facilities requirements and serve the purposes established by this Act. The Secretary is authorized, in consultation with the Secretary
of State, through grant or cooperative agreement, to make available to public or nonprofit private institutions or agencies in participating foreign countries, funds to acquire, lease, alter, or renovate facilities in
those countries as necessary to conduct programs of assistance for international health
activities, including activities relating to
HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases,
chronic and environmental diseases, and
other health activities abroad.
(3) The Secretary is authorized to provide
to personnel appointed or assigned by the
Secretary to serve abroad, allowances and
benefits similar to those provided under
chapter 9 of title I of the Foreign Service Act
of 1980, and 22 U.S.C. 4081 through 4086 and
subject to such regulations prescribed by the
Secretary. The Secretary is further authorized to provide locality-based comparability
payments (stated as a percentage) up to the
amount of the locality-based comparability
payment (stated as a percentage) that would
be payable to such personnel under section
5304 of title 5, United States Code if such personnel’s official duty station were in the District of Columbia. Leaves of absence for personnel under this subsection shall be on the
same basis as that provided under subchapter I of chapter 63 of title 5, United
States Code, or section 903 of the Foreign
Service Act of 1980, to individuals serving in
the Foreign Service.
(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 213. The Director of the NIH, jointly
with the Director of the Office of AIDS Research, may transfer up to 3 percent among
institutes and centers from the total
amounts identified by these two Directors as
funding for research pertaining to the human
immunodeficiency virus: Provided, That the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate are notified at least 15 days in advance of any transfer.
(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 214. Of the amounts made available in
this Act for NIH, the amount for research related to the human immunodeficiency virus,
as jointly determined by the Director of NIH
and the Director of the Office of AIDS Research, shall be made available to the ‘‘Office of AIDS Research’’ account. The Director of the Office of AIDS Research shall
transfer from such account amounts necessary to carry out section 2353(d)(3) of the
PHS Act.
SEC. 215. (a) AUTHORITY.—Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, the Director of
NIH (‘‘Director’’) may use funds authorized
under section 402(b)(12) of the PHS Act to
enter into transactions (other than contracts, cooperative agreements, or grants) to
carry out research identified pursuant to or
research and activities described in such section 402(b)(12).
(b) PEER REVIEW.—In entering into transactions under subsection (a), the Director
may utilize such peer review procedures (including consultation with appropriate scientific experts) as the Director determines
to be appropriate to obtain assessments of
scientific and technical merit. Such procedures shall apply to such transactions in lieu
of the peer review and advisory council re-

PO 00000

Frm 00050

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

view procedures that would otherwise be required under sections 301(a)(3), 405(b)(1)(B),
405(b)(2), 406(a)(3)(A), 492, and 494 of the PHS
Act.
(c) NOTIFICATION.—The Director shall notify the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate
not later than 15 days after the Director exercises the authority under subsection (a) for
any transaction that is expected to cost the
NIH in excess of $100,000,000.
SEC. 216. Not to exceed $100,000,000 of funds
appropriated by this Act to the institutes
and centers of the National Institutes of
Health may be used for alteration, repair, or
improvement of facilities, as necessary for
the proper and efficient conduct of the activities authorized herein, at not to exceed
$5,000,000 per project.
(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 217. Of the amounts made available
for NIH, 1 percent of the amount made available for National Research Service Awards
(‘‘NRSA’’) shall be made available to the Administrator of the Health Resources and
Services Administration to make NRSA
awards for research in primary medical care
to individuals affiliated with entities who
have received grants or contracts under sections 736, 739, or 747 of the PHS Act, and 1
percent of the amount made available for
NRSA shall be made available to the Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality to make NRSA awards for
health service research.
SEC. 218. (a) The Biomedical Advanced Research
and
Development
Authority
(‘‘BARDA’’) may enter into a contract, for
more than one but no more than 10 program
years, for purchase of research services or of
security countermeasures, as that term is
defined in section 319F–2(c)(1)(B) of the PHS
Act (42 U.S.C. 247d–6b(c)(1)(B)), if—
(1) funds are available and obligated—
(A) for the full period of the contract or for
the first fiscal year in which the contract is
in effect; and
(B) for the estimated costs associated with
a necessary termination of the contract; and
(2) the Secretary determines that a multiyear contract will serve the best interests of
the Federal Government by encouraging full
and open competition or promoting economy
in administration, performance, and operation of BARDA’s programs.
(b) A contract entered into under this section—
(1) shall include a termination clause as
described by subsection (c) of section 3903 of
title 41, United States Code; and
(2) shall be subject to the congressional notice requirement stated in subsection (d) of
such section.
SEC. 219. (a) The Secretary shall publish in
the fiscal year 2027 budget justification and
on Departmental Web sites information concerning the employment of full-time equivalent Federal employees or contractors for
the purposes of implementing, administering, enforcing, or otherwise carrying out
the provisions of the ACA, and the amendments made by that Act, in the proposed fiscal year and each fiscal year since the enactment of the ACA.
(b) With respect to employees or contractors supported by all funds appropriated for
purposes of carrying out the ACA (and the
amendments made by that Act), the Secretary shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) For each such fiscal year, the section of
such Act under which such funds were appropriated, a statement indicating the program,
project, or activity receiving such funds, the
Federal operating division or office that administers such program, and the amount of
funding received in discretionary or mandatory appropriations.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

(2) For each such fiscal year, the number of
full-time equivalent employees or contracted
employees assigned to each authorized and
funded provision detailed in accordance with
paragraph (1).
(c) In carrying out this section, the Secretary may exclude from the report employees or contractors who—
(1) are supported through appropriations
enacted in laws other than the ACA and
work on programs that existed prior to the
passage of the ACA;
(2) spend less than 50 percent of their time
on activities funded by or newly authorized
in the ACA; or
(3) work on contracts for which FTE reporting is not a requirement of their contract, such as fixed-price contracts.
SEC. 220. The Secretary shall publish, as
part of the fiscal year 2027 budget of the
President submitted under section 1105(a) of
title 31, United States Code, information
that details the uses of all funds used by the
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
specifically for Health Insurance Exchanges
for each fiscal year since the enactment of
the ACA and the proposed uses for such funds
for fiscal year 2027. Such information shall
include, for each such fiscal year, the
amount of funds used for each activity specified under the heading ‘‘Health Insurance
Exchange Transparency’’ in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act).
SEC. 221. None of the funds made available
by this Act from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund or the Federal Supplemental Medical Insurance Trust Fund, or
transferred from other accounts funded by
this Act to the ‘‘Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services—Program Management’’ account, may be used for payments under section 1342(b)(1) of Public Law 111–148 (relating
to risk corridors).

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 222. (a) Within 45 days of enactment of
this Act, the Secretary shall transfer funds
appropriated under section 4002 of the ACA
to the accounts specified, in the amounts
specified, and for the activities specified
under the heading ‘‘Prevention and Public
Health Fund’’ in the explanatory statement
described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act).
(b) Notwithstanding section 4002(c) of the
ACA, the Secretary may not further transfer
these amounts.
(c) Funds transferred for activities authorized under section 2821 of the PHS Act shall
be made available without reference to section 2821(b) of such Act.
SEC. 223. Effective during the period beginning on November 1, 2015 and ending January
1, 2028, any provision of law that refers (including through cross-reference to another
provision of law) to the current recommendations of the United States Preventive Services Task Force with respect to
breast cancer screening, mammography, and
prevention shall be administered by the Secretary involved as if—
(1) such reference to such current recommendations were a reference to the recommendations of such Task Force with respect to breast cancer screening, mammography, and prevention last issued before 2009;
and
(2) such recommendations last issued before 2009 applied to any screening mammography modality under section 1861(jj) of the
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(jj)).
SEC. 224. In making Federal financial assistance, the provisions relating to indirect
costs in part 75 of title 45, Code of Federal
Regulations, including with respect to the
approval of deviations from negotiated rates,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1225

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

shall continue to apply to the National Institutes of Health to the same extent and in the
same manner as such provisions were applied
in the third quarter of fiscal year 2017. None
of the funds appropriated in this or prior
Acts or otherwise made available to the Department of Health and Human Services or
to any department or agency may be used to
develop or implement a modified approach to
such provisions, or to intentionally or substantially expand the fiscal effect of the approval of such deviations from negotiated
rates beyond the proportional effect of such
approvals in such quarter.
(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 225. The NIH Director may transfer
funds for opioid addiction, opioid alternatives, stimulant misuse and addiction,
pain management, and addiction treatment
to other Institutes and Centers of the NIH to
be used for the same purpose 15 days after
notifying the Committees on Appropriations
of the House of Representatives and the Senate: Provided, That the transfer authority
provided in the previous proviso is in addition to any other transfer authority provided
by law.
SEC. 226. (a) The Secretary shall provide to
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate:
(1) Detailed monthly enrollment figures
from the Exchanges established under the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
of 2010 pertaining to enrollments during the
open enrollment period; and
(2) Notification of any new or competitive
grant awards, including supplements, authorized under section 330 of the Public
Health Service Act.
(b) The Committees on Appropriations of
the House and Senate must be notified at
least 2 business days in advance of any public release of enrollment information or the
award of such grants.
SEC. 227. In addition to the amounts otherwise available for ‘‘Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services, Program Management’’,
the Secretary of Health and Human Services
may transfer up to $455,000,000 to such account from the Federal Hospital Insurance
Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary
Medical Insurance Trust Fund to support
program management activity related to the
Medicare Program: Provided, That except for
the foregoing purpose, such funds may not be
used to support any provision of Public Law
111–148 or Public Law 111–152 (or any amendment made by either such Public Law) or to
supplant any other amounts within such account.
SEC. 228. The Department of Health and
Human Services shall provide the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and Senate a biannual report 30
days after enactment of this Act on staffing
described in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act).
SEC. 229. Funds appropriated in this Act
that are available for salaries and expenses
of employees of the Department of Health
and Human Services shall also be available
to pay travel and related expenses of such an
employee or of a member of his or her family, when such employee is assigned to duty,
in the United States or in a U.S. territory,
during a period and in a location that are the
subject of a determination of a public health
emergency under section 319 of the Public
Health Service Act and such travel is necessary to obtain medical care for an illness,
injury, or medical condition that cannot be
adequately addressed in that location at that
time. For purposes of this section, the term
‘‘U.S. territory’’ means Guam, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Northern Mariana
Islands, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa,
or the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.

PO 00000

Frm 00051

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SEC. 230. The Department of Health and
Human Services may accept donations from
the private sector, nongovernmental organizations, and other groups independent of the
Federal Government for the care of unaccompanied alien children (as defined in section 462(g)(2) of the Homeland Security Act
of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 279(g)(2))) in the care of the
Office of Refugee Resettlement of the Administration for Children and Families, including medical goods and services, which
may include early childhood developmental
screenings, school supplies, toys, clothing,
and any other items intended to promote the
wellbeing of such children.
SEC. 231. None of the funds made available
in this Act under the heading ‘‘Department
of Health and Human Services—Administration for Children and Families—Refugee and
Entrant Assistance’’ may be obligated to a
grantee or contractor to house unaccompanied alien children (as such term is defined
in section 462(g)(2) of the Homeland Security
Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 279(g)(2))) in any facility
that is not State-licensed for the care of unaccompanied alien children, except in the
case that the Secretary determines that
housing unaccompanied alien children in
such a facility is necessary on a temporary
basis due to an influx of such children or an
emergency, provided that—
(1) the terms of the grant or contract for
the operations of any such facility that remains in operation for more than six consecutive months shall require compliance
with—
(A) the same requirements as licensed
placements, as listed in Exhibit 1 of the Flores Settlement Agreement that the Secretary determines are applicable to nonState licensed facilities; and
(B) staffing ratios of one (1) on-duty Youth
Care Worker for every eight (8) children or
youth during waking hours, one (1) on-duty
Youth Care Worker for every sixteen (16)
children or youth during sleeping hours, and
clinician ratios to children (including mental health providers) as required in grantee
cooperative agreements;
(2) the Secretary may grant a 60-day waiver for a contractor’s or grantee’s non-compliance with paragraph (1) if the Secretary certifies and provides a report to Congress on
the contractor’s or grantee’s good-faith efforts and progress towards compliance;
(3) not more than four consecutive waivers
under paragraph (2) may be granted to a contractor or grantee with respect to a specific
facility;
(4) ORR shall ensure full adherence to the
monitoring requirements set forth in section
5.5 of its Policies and Procedures Guide as of
May 15, 2019;
(5) for any such unlicensed facility in operation for more than three consecutive
months, ORR shall conduct a minimum of
one comprehensive monitoring visit during
the first three months of operation, with
quarterly monitoring visits thereafter; and
(6) not later than 60 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, ORR shall brief the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate outlining
the requirements of ORR for influx facilities
including any requirement listed in paragraph (1)(A) that the Secretary has determined are not applicable to non-State licensed facilities.
SEC. 232. In addition to the existing Congressional notification for formal site assessments of potential influx facilities, the Secretary shall notify the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate at least 15 days before
operationalizing an unlicensed facility, and
shall (1) specify whether the facility is hardsided or soft-sided, and (2) provide analysis

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1226

that indicates that, in the absence of the influx facility, the likely outcome is that unaccompanied alien children will remain in
the custody of the Department of Homeland
Security for longer than 72 hours or that unaccompanied alien children will be otherwise
placed in danger. Within 60 days of bringing
such a facility online, and monthly thereafter, the Secretary shall provide to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate a report
detailing the total number of children in
care at the facility, the average length of
stay and average length of care of children
at the facility, and, for any child that has
been at the facility for more than 60 days,
their length of stay and reason for delay in
release.
SEC. 233. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used to prevent a United
States Senator or Member of the House of
Representatives from entering, for the purpose of conducting oversight, any facility in
the United States used for the purpose of
maintaining custody of, or otherwise housing, unaccompanied alien children (as defined in section 462(g)(2) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 279(g)(2))), provided that such Senator or Member has coordinated the oversight visit with the Office
of Refugee Resettlement not less than two
business days in advance to ensure that such
visit would not interfere with the operations
(including child welfare and child safety operations) of such facility.
SEC. 234. Not later than 14 days after the
date of enactment of this Act, and monthly
thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate, and make
publicly available online, a report with respect to children who were separated from
their parents or legal guardians by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) (regardless of whether or not such separation
was pursuant to an option selected by the
children, parents, or guardians), subsequently classified as unaccompanied alien
children, and transferred to the care and custody of ORR during the previous month.
Each report shall contain the following information:
(1) the number and ages of children so separated subsequent to apprehension at or between ports of entry, to be reported by sector
where separation occurred; and
(2) the documented cause of separation, as
reported by DHS when each child was referred.
SEC. 235. Funds appropriated in this Act
that are available for salaries and expenses
of employees of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shall also be available
for the primary and secondary schooling of
eligible dependents of personnel stationed in
a U.S. territory at costs not in excess of
those paid for or reimbursed by the Department of Defense: Provided, That for purposes
of this section, the term ‘‘U.S. territory’’
means Guam, the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, or the Trust
Territory of the Pacific Islands.
SEC. 236. Funds made available in this Act
under each of the headings ‘‘Immunization
and Respiratory Diseases’’, ‘‘HIV/AIDS, Viral
Hepatitis, Sexually Transmitted Diseases,
and Tuberculosis Prevention’’, ‘‘Emerging
and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases’’, ‘‘Chronic
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion’’,
‘‘Birth Defects, Developmental Disabilities,
Disabilities and Health’’, ‘‘Public Health Scientific Services’’, ‘‘Environmental Health’’,
‘‘Injury Prevention and Control’’, ‘‘National
Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health’’, ‘‘Global Health’’, ‘‘Public Health
Preparedness and Response’’, and ‘‘CDC-Wide
Activities and Program Support’’ shall be for

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

the budget activities, and in the amounts
specified in the table under each such heading in the explanatory statement described
in section 4 (in the matter preceding division
A of this consolidated Act).
(RESCISSION)

SEC. 237. Of the unobligated balances in the
‘‘Nonrecurring Expenses Fund’’ established
in section 223 of division G of Public Law
110–161, $1,826,000,000 are hereby rescinded not
later than September 30, 2026, except that no
amounts may be rescinded from amounts
that were previously designated by the Congress as being for an emergency requirement
pursuant to a concurrent resolution on the
budget or the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
SEC. 238. The Director of the NIH shall
hereafter require institutions that receive
funds through a grant or cooperative agreement or other form of extramural award during fiscal year 2026 and in future years to
complete any investigation undertaken due
to concerns about harassment, bullying retaliation, or hostile working conditions regarding any individual identified as a principal investigator or key personnel in an NIH
notice of award or progress report even if
during the course of the investigation the individual under investigation leaves their
current position and is no longer employed
by the institution. The Director may hereafter decline transfer of an ongoing extramural award to a different institution if concerns about harassment, bullying, hostile
work environment, or other professional
misconduct on the part of a principal investigator or key personnel named in the Notice
of Award or progress report have not been resolved to the NIH’s satisfaction. The Director of the NIH shall hereafter have the authority to share investigation reports, conclusions, and results of any investigation of
individuals identified as a principal investigator or as key personnel in an NIH notice of
award or progress report due to concerns
about harassment, bullying, retaliation, or
hostile working conditions on an as needed
basis with any institution that receives
funds through a grant or cooperative agreement or other form of extramural award during fiscal year 2026 or any subsequent fiscal
year. The Director may issue regulations
consistent with this section.
SEC. 239. The Department of Health and
Human Services shall support staffing levels
necessary to fulfill its statutory responsibilities including carrying out programs,
projects, and activities funded in this title of
this Act in a timely manner: Provided, That
the Secretary shall submit a detailed plan
and justification to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate, and make publicly available
to allow for an independent review not less
than 60 days prior to initiating the execution
of any reorganization moving functions, pursuant to any authorities otherwise provided,
carried out by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to another component of
the Department of Health and Human Services, relative to how such functions are funded in this Act.
SEC. 240. (a) Not to exceed the amount of
funds made available under the heading ‘‘National Institutes of Health’’ in fiscal year
2025 that were obligated during fiscal year
2025 for more than one year of a multiyear
award may be obligated in fiscal year 2026
from amounts made available under such
heading in this Act for more than one year of
a multiyear award.
(b) A multiyear award, as the term is used
in this section, includes multiyear awards
for grants, cooperative agreements, contracts, and any other financial mechanisms.
SEC. 241. The Administrator of the Centers
for Medicare & Medicaid Services shall not

PO 00000

Frm 00052

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

apply the distance requirements under
1820(c)(2)(B)(i)(I) of the Social Security Act
(42 U.S.C. 1395i–4(c)(2)(B)(i)(I)) to any facility
with a critical access hospital provider
agreement that was designated and certified
as a critical access hospital as of January 1,
2024, and receives a notification letter from
the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services during the period beginning on December 1, 2024, and ending on January 1, 2026,
that the facility was found to be noncompliant with such distance requirements under
section 1820(c)(2)(B)(i)(I) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i–4(c)(2)(B)(i)(I)). In
the case where a provider agreement for such
facility was terminated on or after December
1, 2024 but prior to the date of enactment of
this Act exclusively because such facility
was unable to meet the distance requirement
under section 1820(c)(2)(B)(i)(I) of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i–4(c)(2)(B)(i)(I)),
the Administrator shall provide for the recertification of such facility as a critical access hospital and reinstatement of such provider agreement. This provision shall not be
construed to prohibit the application of any
other enforcement measures deemed necessary by the Administrator, including termination of the provider agreement, in response to such facility’s violation of any
Federal regulation other than the distance
requirement.
This title may be cited as the ‘‘Department
of Health and Human Services Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
TITLE III
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY
EDUCATION
EDUCATION FOR THE DISADVANTAGED

For carrying out title I and subpart 2 of
part B of title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (referred to in
this Act as ‘‘ESEA’’) and section 418A of the
Higher Education Act of 1965 (referred to in
this Act as ‘‘HEA’’), $19,127,790,000, of which
$8,199,490,000 shall become available on July
1, 2026, and shall remain available through
September
30,
2027,
and
of
which
$10,841,177,000 shall become available on October 1, 2026, and shall remain available
through September 30, 2027, for academic
year 2026–2027: Provided, That $6,459,401,000
shall be for basic grants under section 1124 of
the ESEA: Provided further, That up to
$5,000,000 of these funds shall be available to
the Secretary of Education (referred to in
this title as ‘‘Secretary’’) on October 1, 2025,
to obtain annually updated local educational
agency-level census poverty data from the
Bureau of the Census: Provided further, That
$1,362,301,000 shall be for concentration
grants under section 1124A of the ESEA: Provided further, That $5,302,550,000 shall be for
targeted grants under section 1125 of the
ESEA: Provided further, That $5,302,550,000
shall be for education finance incentive
grants under section 1125A of the ESEA: Provided further, That $224,000,000 shall be for
carrying out subpart 2 of part B of title II:
Provided further, That $52,123,000 shall be for
carrying out section 418A of the HEA.
IMPACT AID

For carrying out programs of financial assistance to federally affected schools authorized by title VII of the ESEA, $1,630,151,000,
of which $1,477,000,000 shall be for basic support
payments
under
section
7003(b),
$49,316,000 shall be for payments for children
with disabilities under section 7003(d),
$19,000,000 to remain available through September 30, 2027, shall be for construction
under section 7007(b), $80,000,000 shall be for
Federal property payments under section
7002, and $4,835,000, to remain available until
expended, shall be for facilities maintenance

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

under section 7008: Provided, That for purposes of computing the amount of a payment
for an eligible local educational agency
under section 7003(a) for school year 2025–
2026, children enrolled in a school of such
agency that would otherwise be eligible for
payment under section 7003(a)(1)(B) of such
Act, but due to the deployment of both parents or legal guardians, or a parent or legal
guardian having sole custody of such children, or due to the death of a military parent
or legal guardian while on active duty (so
long as such children reside on Federal property as described in section 7003(a)(1)(B)), are
no longer eligible under such section, shall
be considered as eligible students under such
section, provided such students remain in average daily attendance at a school in the
same local educational agency they attended
prior to their change in eligibility status.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS

For carrying out school improvement activities authorized by part B of title I, part
A of title II, subpart 1 of part A of title IV,
part B of title IV, part B of title V, and parts
B and C of title VI of the ESEA; the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act; section
203 of the Educational Technical Assistance
Act of 2002; and the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
$5,781,178,000, of which $3,952,312,000 shall become available on July 1, 2026, and remain
available through September 30, 2027, and of
which $1,681,441,000 shall become available on
October 1, 2026, and shall remain available
through September 30, 2027, for academic
year 2026–2027: Provided, That $2,190,080,000
shall be for part A of title II of the ESEA:
Provided further, That $380,000,000 shall be for
part B of title I: Provided further, That
$1,329,673,000 shall be for part B of title IV:
Provided further, That $45,897,000 shall be for
part B of title VI, which may be used for construction, renovation, and modernization of
any public elementary school, secondary
school, or structure related to a public elementary school or secondary school that
serves a predominantly Native Hawaiian student body, and that the 5 percent limitation
in section 6205(b) of the ESEA on the use of
funds for administrative purposes shall apply
only to direct administrative costs: Provided
further, That the Secretary shall use $650,000
of funds made available in the preceding proviso to carry out section 6204 of the ESEA:
Provided further, That $44,953,000 shall be for
part C of title VI, which shall be awarded on
a competitive basis, and may be used for construction, and that the 5 percent limitation
in section 6305 of the ESEA on the use of
funds for administrative purposes shall apply
only to direct administrative costs: Provided
further, That $50,000,000 shall be available to
carry out section 203 of the Educational
Technical Assistance Act of 2002 and the Secretary shall make such arrangements as determined to be necessary to ensure that the
Bureau of Indian Education has access to
services provided under this section: Provided
further, That $225,000,000 shall be for part B of
title V: Provided further, That in carrying out
such part B the percentage in section
316(b)(1)(F) of title III of division H of Public
Law 116–260 shall be deemed 83.33 percent:
Provided further, That $1,380,000,000 shall be
available for grants under subpart 1 of part A
of title IV: Provided further, That $129,000,000
shall be for subpart B of title VII of the
McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act,
which shall be available for expenditure by
educational agencies and institutions for an
additional fiscal year following the succeeding fiscal year provided by subsection
421(b)(1) of the General Education Provisions
Act.
INDIAN EDUCATION

For expenses necessary to carry out, to the
extent not otherwise provided, title VI, part

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1227

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

A of the ESEA, $196,746,000, of which
$72,000,000 shall be for subpart 2 of part A of
title VI and $14,365,000 shall be for subpart 3
of part A of title VI: Provided, That the 5 percent limitation in sections 6115(d), 6121(e),
and 6133(g) of the ESEA on the use of funds
for administrative purposes shall apply only
to direct administrative costs: Provided further, That grants awarded under sections 6132
and 6133 of the ESEA with funds provided
under this heading may be for a period of up
to 5 years: Provided further, That the Secretary may make awards under subpart 3 of
part A of title VI without regard to the funding limitation in section 6133(b)(1) of the
ESEA.

That $150,000,000 shall be available for section 4625: Provided further, That $91,000,000
shall be for section 4624.
OFFICE OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
ENGLISH LANGUAGE ACQUISITION

For carrying out part A of title III of the
ESEA, $890,000,000, which shall become available on July 1, 2026, and shall remain available through September 30, 2027, except that
6.5 percent of such amount shall be available
on October 1, 2025, and shall remain available
through September 30, 2027, to carry out activities under section 3111(c)(1)(C).
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND
REHABILITATIVE SERVICES

INNOVATION AND IMPROVEMENT

SPECIAL EDUCATION

For carrying out activities authorized by
subparts 1, 3, and 4 of part B of title II, and
parts C, D, and E and subparts 1 and 4 of part
F of title IV of the ESEA, $1,191,147,000,
which shall be for the purposes and in the
amounts specified in the ‘‘Final Bill’’ column for Innovation and Improvement in the
‘‘Departments of Labor, Health and Human
Services, Education, and Related Agencies
Appropriations Act, 2026’’ table in the explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act), of which the amounts
made available for ‘‘Community Project
Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’
are for the projects, and in the amounts,
specified for this account in the table titled
‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act) and none of the funds made available
for such projects shall be subject to section
302 of this Act: Provided, That amounts for
subparts 1, 3, and 4 of part B of title II shall
be made available without regard to sections
2201, 2231(b), and 2241: Provided further, That
amounts for parts C, D, and E and subpart 4
of part F of title IV shall be made available
without regard to sections 4311, 4409(a), and
4601 of the ESEA: Provided further, That section 4303(d)(3)(A)(i) shall not apply to the
funds available for part C of title IV: Provided further, That of the funds available for
part C of title IV, the Secretary shall use not
less than $60,000,000 to carry out section 4304,
not more than $140,000,000, to remain available through March 31, 2027, to carry out section 4305(b), from which the amount necessary for continuation grants may be available for obligation through March 31, 2027,
and not more than $16,000,000 to carry out
the activities in section 4305(a)(3): Provided
further,
That
notwithstanding
section
4601(b), $235,000,000 shall be available through
December 31, 2026 for subpart 1 of part F of
title IV: Provided further, That of the funds
available for subpart 4 of part F of title IV,
not less than $8,000,000 shall be used for
grants for eligible national nonprofit organizations, as described in the Applications for
New Awards; Assistance for Arts Education
Program published in the Federal Register
on May 31, 2022, for activities described
under section 4642(a)(1)(C): Provided further,
That the competitive preference priority described in such notice shall be given only to
an eligible national nonprofit organization
that previously received the competitive
preference priority pursuant to such notice.

For carrying out the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and the Special Olympics Sport and Empowerment Act
of 2004, $15,490,264,000, of which $5,910,321,000
shall become available on July 1, 2026, and
shall remain available through September
30, 2027, and of which $9,283,383,000 shall become available on October 1, 2026, and shall
remain available through September 30, 2027,
for academic year 2026–2027: Provided, That
the amount for section 611(b)(2) of the IDEA
shall be equal to the lesser of the amount
available for that activity during fiscal year
2025, increased by the amount of inflation as
specified in section 619(d)(2)(B) of the IDEA,
or the percent change in the funds appropriated under section 611(i) of the IDEA, but
not less than the amount for that activity
during fiscal year 2025: Provided further, That
the Secretary shall, without regard to section 611(d) of the IDEA, distribute to all
other States (as that term is defined in section 611(g)(2)), subject to the third proviso,
any amount by which a State’s allocation
under section 611, from funds appropriated
under this heading, is reduced under section
612(a)(18)(B), according to the following: 85
percent on the basis of the States’ relative
populations of children aged 3 through 21
who are of the same age as children with disabilities for whom the State ensures the
availability of a free appropriate public education under this part, and 15 percent to
States on the basis of the States’ relative
populations of those children who are living
in poverty: Provided further, That the Secretary may not distribute any funds under
the previous proviso to any State whose reduction in allocation from funds appropriated under this heading made funds available for such a distribution: Provided further,
That the States shall allocate such funds distributed under the second proviso to local
educational agencies in accordance with section 611(f): Provided further, That the amount
by which a State’s allocation under section
611(d) of the IDEA is reduced under section
612(a)(18)(B) and the amounts distributed to
States under the previous provisos in fiscal
year 2012 or any subsequent year shall not be
considered in calculating the awards under
section 611(d) for fiscal year 2013 or for any
subsequent fiscal years: Provided further,
That, notwithstanding the provision in section 612(a)(18)(B) regarding the fiscal year in
which a State’s allocation under section
611(d) is reduced for failure to comply with
the requirement of section 612(a)(18)(A), the
Secretary may apply the reduction specified
in section 612(a)(18)(B) over a period of consecutive fiscal years, not to exceed 5, until
the entire reduction is applied: Provided further, That the Secretary may, in any fiscal
year in which a State’s allocation under section 611 is reduced in accordance with section 612(a)(18)(B), reduce the amount a State
may reserve under section 611(e)(1) by an
amount that bears the same relation to the
maximum amount described in that paragraph as the reduction under section

SAFE SCHOOLS AND CITIZENSHIP EDUCATION

For carrying out activities authorized by
subparts 2 and 3 of part F of title IV of the
ESEA, $431,000,000, to remain available
through December 31, 2026: Provided, That
$190,000,000 shall be available for section 4631,
of which up to $6,000,000, to remain available
until expended, shall be for the Project
School Emergency Response to Violence
(Project SERV) program: Provided further,

PO 00000

Frm 00053

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1228

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

612(a)(18)(B) bears to the total allocation the
State would have received in that fiscal year
under section 611(d) in the absence of the reduction: Provided further, That the Secretary
shall either reduce the allocation of funds
under section 611 for any fiscal year following the fiscal year for which the State
fails to comply with the requirement of section 612(a)(18)(A) as authorized by section
612(a)(18)(B), or seek to recover funds under
section 452 of the General Education Provisions Act (20 U.S.C. 1234a): Provided further,
That the funds reserved under 611(c) of the
IDEA may be used to provide technical assistance to States to improve the capacity of
the States to meet the data collection requirements of sections 616 and 618 and to administer and carry out other services and activities to improve data collection, coordination, quality, and use under parts B and C of
the IDEA: Provided further, That the Secretary may use funds made available for the
State Personnel Development Grants program under part D, subpart 1 of IDEA to
evaluate program performance under such
subpart: Provided further, That States may
use funds reserved for other State-level activities under sections 611(e)(2) and 619(f) of
the IDEA to make subgrants to local educational agencies, institutions of higher education, other public agencies, and private
non-profit organizations to carry out activities authorized by those sections: Provided
further,
That,
notwithstanding
section
643(e)(2)(A) of the IDEA, if 5 or fewer States
apply for grants pursuant to section 643(e) of
such Act, the Secretary shall provide a grant
to each State in an amount equal to the
maximum amount described in section
643(e)(2)(B) of such Act: Provided further,
That if more than 5 States apply for grants
pursuant to section 643(e) of the IDEA, the
Secretary shall award funds to those States
on the basis of the States’ relative populations of infants and toddlers except that no
such State shall receive a grant in excess of
the amount described in section 643(e)(2)(B)
of such Act: Provided further, That States
may use funds allotted under section 643(c)
of the IDEA to make subgrants to local educational agencies, institutions of higher education, other public agencies, and private
non-profit organizations to carry out activities authorized by section 638 of IDEA: Provided further, That, notwithstanding section
638 of the IDEA, a State may use funds it receives under section 633 of the IDEA to offer
continued early intervention services to a
child who previously received services under
part C of the IDEA from age 3 until the beginning of the school year following the
child’s third birthday with parental consent
and without regard to the procedures in section 635(c) of the IDEA: Provided further,
That notwithstanding section 638 of the
IDEA, a State may use funds appropriated
under Part C of the IDEA to conduct child
find, public awareness, and referral activities
for an individual who is expected to become
a parent of an infant with a disability (as
that term is defined in section 632(5)), as established by medical or other records: Provided further, That any State electing to use
funds under the preceding proviso shall ensure that, as soon as possible but not later
than 45 days after the child’s birth, it completes the referral and eligibility process
under this part for that child.
REHABILITATION SERVICES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For carrying out, to the extent not otherwise provided, the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
and the Helen Keller National Center Act,
$4,648,295,000, of which $4,504,096,000 shall be
for grants for vocational rehabilitation services under title I of the Rehabilitation Act:
Provided, That the Secretary may use

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

amounts provided in this Act that remain
available subsequent to the reallotment of
funds to States pursuant to section 110(b) of
the Rehabilitation Act for innovative activities aimed at increasing competitive integrated employment as defined in section 7 of
such Act for youth and other individuals
with disabilities, including related Federal
administrative expenses, for improving monitoring and oversight of grants for vocational rehabilitation services under title I of
the Rehabilitation Act, and information
technology needs under section 15 and titles
I, III, VI, and VII of the Rehabilitation Act:
Provided further, That up to 15 percent of the
amounts available subsequent to reallotment for the activities described in the first
proviso from funds provided under this paragraph in this Act, may be used for evaluation
and technical assistance related to such activities: Provided further, That any funds
made available subsequent to reallotment
for the activities described in the first proviso may be provided to States and other
public, private and nonprofit entities, including Indian Tribes and institutions of
higher education for carrying out such activities: Provided further, That States and
other public and nonprofit entities, including
Indian Tribes and institutions of higher education may award subgrants for a portion of
the funds to other eligible entities: Provided
further, That any funds provided in this Act
and made available subsequent to reallotment for the purposes described in the first
proviso shall remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided further, That any
funds provided in the Full-Year Continuing
Appropriations and Extensions Act, 2025
(Public Law 119–4) and made available subsequent to reallotment shall remain available
until September 30, 2026: Provided further,
That the Secretary may transfer funds provided in this Act and made available subsequent to the reallotment of funds to States
pursuant to section 110(b) of the Rehabilitation Act to ‘‘Institute of Education
Sciences’’ for the evaluation of outcomes for
students receiving services and supports
under IDEA and under title I, section 504 of
title V, and title VI of the Rehabilitation
Act: Provided further, That the transfer authority in the preceding proviso is in addition to any other transfer authority in this
Act.
SPECIAL INSTITUTIONS FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES
AMERICAN PRINTING HOUSE FOR THE BLIND

For carrying out the Act to Promote the
Education of the Blind of March 3, 1879,
$43,431,000.
NATIONAL TECHNICAL INSTITUTE FOR THE DEAF

For the National Technical Institute for
the Deaf under titles I and II of the Education of the Deaf Act of 1986, $92,500,000: Provided, That from the total amount available,
the Institute may at its discretion use funds
for the endowment program as authorized
under section 207 of such Act.
GALLAUDET UNIVERSITY

For the Kendall Demonstration Elementary School, the Model Secondary School for
the Deaf, and the partial support of Gallaudet University under titles I and II of the
Education of the Deaf Act of 1986,
$167,361,000, of which up to $15,000,000, to remain available until expended, shall be for
construction, as defined by section 201(2) of
such Act: Provided, That from the total
amount available, the University may at its
discretion use funds for the endowment program as authorized under section 207 of such
Act.

PO 00000

Frm 00054

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

OFFICE OF CAREER, TECHNICAL, AND ADULT
EDUCATION
CAREER, TECHNICAL, AND ADULT EDUCATION
For carrying out, to the extent not otherwise provided, the Carl D. Perkins Career
and Technical Education Act of 2006 (‘‘Perkins Act’’) and the Adult Education and
Family
Literacy
Act
(‘‘AEFLA’’),
$2,181,436,000, of which $1,390,436,000 shall become available on July 1, 2026, and shall remain available through September 30, 2027,
and of which $791,000,000 shall become available on October 1, 2026, and shall remain
available through September 30, 2027: Provided, That up to $6,100,000 shall be available
for innovation and modernization grants
under such section 114(e) of the Perkins Act:
Provided further, That of the amounts made
available for AEFLA, $13,712,000 shall be for
national leadership activities under section
242.
OFFICE OF FEDERAL STUDENT AID
STUDENT FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

For carrying out subparts 1 and 3 of part A,
and part C of title IV of the HEA,
$24,615,352,000 which shall remain available
through September 30, 2027: Provided, That
$22,475,352,000 shall be for subpart 1 of part A,
$910,000,000 shall be for subpart 3 of part A,
and $1,230,000,000 shall be for part C.
The maximum Pell Grant for which a student shall be eligible during award year 2026–
2027 shall be $6,335.
STUDENT AID ADMINISTRATION

For Federal administrative expenses to
carry out part D of title I, and subparts 1, 3,
9, and 10 of part A, and parts B, C, D, and E
of title IV of the HEA, and subpart 1 of part
A of title VII of the Public Health Service
Act, $2,058,943,000, to remain available
through September 30, 2027: Provided, That in
order to promote accountability and highquality service to borrowers, the Secretary
shall not award funding for any contract solicitation for a new Federal student loan
servicing environment unless such an environment provides for the participation of
multiple student loan servicers that contract
directly with the Department of Education
to manage a unique portfolio of borrower accounts and the full life-cycle of loans from
disbursement to pay-off with certain limited
exceptions, and allocates student loan borrower accounts to eligible student loan
servicers based on performance: Provided further, That the Department shall re-allocate
accounts from servicers for recurring noncompliance with FSA guidelines, contractual
requirements, and applicable laws, including
for failure to sufficiently inform borrowers
of available repayment options: Provided further, That such servicers shall be evaluated
based on their ability to meet contract requirements (including an understanding of
Federal and State law), future performance
on the contracts, and history of compliance
with applicable consumer protections laws:
Provided further, That FSA shall ensure that
the Federal loan servicing environment
incentivizes more support to borrowers at
risk of delinquency or default: Provided further, That FSA shall ensure that in such environment contractors have the capacity to
meet and are held accountable for performance on service levels; are held accountable
for and have a history of compliance with applicable consumer protection laws; and have
relevant experience and demonstrated effectiveness: Provided further, That the Secretary
shall provide monthly briefings to the Committees on Appropriations and Education
and Workforce of the House of Representatives and the Committees on Appropriations
and Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
of the Senate on general progress related to
Federal student loan servicing and repayment: Provided further, That FSA shall

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

strengthen transparency through expanded
publication of aggregate data on student
loan and servicer performance: Provided further, That the limitation in section 302 of
this Act regarding transfers increasing any
appropriation shall apply to transfers to appropriations under this heading by substituting ‘‘10 percent’’ for ‘‘3 percent’’ for the
purposes of the continuation of basic operations, including student loan servicing,
business process operations, digital customer
care, common origination and disbursement,
cybersecurity activities, and information
technology systems: Provided further, That
not later than 45 days after enactment of
this Act, FSA shall provide to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate a detailed spend
plan of anticipated uses of funds made available in this account for fiscal year 2026 and
provide quarterly updates on this plan (including contracts awarded, change orders,
bonuses paid to staff, reorganization costs,
and any other activity carried out using
amounts provided under this heading for fiscal year 2026) no later than 10 days prior to
the start of such quarter: Provided further,
That FSA shall notify the Committees within 10 days of any modification of such spend
plan that exceeds five percent of the amount
appropriated under the heading ‘‘Student
Aid Administration’’.
OFFICE OF POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

HIGHER EDUCATION

For carrying out, to the extent not otherwise provided, titles II, III, IV, V, VI, VII,
and VIII of the HEA, the Mutual Educational
and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961, and section 117 of the Perkins Act, $3,265,598,000, of
which $2,243,711,000 shall be for the purposes
and in the amounts, other than for ‘‘Aid for
Institutional Development’’, specified in the
‘‘Final Bill’’ column for Higher Education in
the ‘‘Departments of Labor, Health and
Human Services, Education, and Related
Agencies Appropriations Act, 2026’’ table in
the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of
this consolidated Act), of which the amounts
made available for Community Project
Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending
are for the projects, and in the amounts,
specified for this account in the table titled
‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act) and none of the funds made available
for such projects shall be subject to section
302 of this Act, and of which the amounts
made available for part B of title VII of the
HEA shall be for the purposes and in the
amounts specified in the table under the
heading ‘‘Fund for the Improvement of Postsecondary Education’’ in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided, That of the amounts provided
under this heading, $493,331,000 shall be for
carrying out part A of title III and title V of
the HEA, of which $53,807,000 shall be for carrying out section 316: Provided further, That
of the amounts provided under this heading,
$528,556,000 shall be for carrying out part B of
title III and section 723 of the HEA, of which
$6,000,000 of the amounts available for section 323 of the HEA shall be for grants to
supplement amounts awarded to part B institutions that are junior or community colleges, as defined in section 312(f) of the HEA:
Provided further, That the supplemental
funds described in the preceding proviso are
in addition to any grant award that any institution may receive under section 323 of
the HEA and shall be allocated in accordance
with the allotments specified under section
324 of such Act: Provided further, That not-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1229

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

withstanding any other provision of law,
funds made available in this Act to carry out
title VI of the HEA and section 102(b)(6) of
the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961 may be used to support
visits and study in foreign countries by individuals who are participating in advanced
foreign language training and international
studies in areas that are vital to United
States national security and who plan to
apply their language skills and knowledge of
these countries in the fields of government,
the professions, or international development: Provided further, That of the funds referred to in the preceding proviso up to 1 percent may be used for program evaluation,
national outreach, and information dissemination activities: Provided further, That up to
1.5 percent of the funds made available under
chapter 2 of subpart 2 of part A of title IV of
the HEA may be used for evaluation: Provided further, That section 313(d) of the HEA
shall not apply to an institution of higher
education that is eligible to receive funding
under section 318 of the HEA: Provided further, That amounts made available for carrying out section 419N of the HEA may be
awarded notwithstanding the limitations in
section 419N(b)(2) of the HEA: Provided further, That activities authorized under sections 317(c)(2)(B), 319(c)(2)(B), and 320(c)(2)(B)
of the HEA may include construction and
maintenance in classrooms, libraries, laboratories, and other instructional facilities.
HOWARD UNIVERSITY

For partial support of Howard University,
$254,018,000, of which not less than $3,405,000
shall be for a matching endowment grant
pursuant to the Howard University Endowment Act and shall remain available until
expended.
COLLEGE HOUSING AND ACADEMIC FACILITIES
LOANS PROGRAM

For Federal administrative expenses to
carry out activities related to existing facility loans pursuant to section 121 of the HEA,
$298,000.
HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY
CAPITAL FINANCING PROGRAM ACCOUNT

For the cost of guaranteed loans,
$20,150,000, as authorized pursuant to part D
of title III of the HEA, which shall remain
available through September 30, 2027: Provided, That such costs, including the cost of
modifying such loans, shall be as defined in
section 502 of the Congressional Budget Act
of 1974: Provided further, That these funds are
available to subsidize total loan principal,
any part of which is to be guaranteed, not to
exceed $500,000,000: Provided further, That
these funds may be used to support loans to
public and private Historically Black Colleges and Universities without regard to the
limitations within section 344(a) of the HEA.
In addition, for administrative expenses to
carry out the Historically Black College and
University Capital Financing Program entered into pursuant to part D of title III of
the HEA, $528,000.
INSTITUTE OF EDUCATION SCIENCES
For necessary expenses for the Institute of
Education Sciences as authorized by section
208 of the Department of Education Organization Act and carrying out activities authorized by the National Assessment of Educational Progress Authorization Act, section
208 of the Educational Technical Assistance
Act of 2002, and section 664 of the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Act, $789,606,000,
to remain available through September 30,
2027, which shall be for the purposes and in
the amounts specified in the ‘‘Final Bill’’
column for Institute of Education Sciences
in the ‘‘Departments of Labor, Health and
Human Services, Education, and Related
Agencies Appropriations Act, 2026’’ table in

PO 00000

Frm 00055

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of
this consolidated Act): Provided, That funds
available to carry out section 208 of the Educational Technical Assistance Act may be
used to link Statewide elementary and secondary data systems with early childhood,
postsecondary, and workforce data systems,
or to further develop such systems: Provided
further, That up to $6,000,000 of the funds
available to carry out section 208 of the Educational Technical Assistance Act may be
used for awards to public or private organizations or agencies to support activities to
improve data coordination, quality, and use
at the local, State, and national levels.
DEPARTMENTAL MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

For carrying out, to the extent not otherwise provided, the Department of Education
Organization Act, including rental of conference rooms in the District of Columbia
and hire of three passenger motor vehicles,
$399,407,000: Provided, That, notwithstanding
any other provision of law, none of the funds
provided by this Act or provided by previous
Appropriations Acts to the Department of
Education available for obligation or expenditure in the current fiscal year may be used
for any activity relating to implementing a
reorganization that decentralizes, reduces
the staffing level, or alters the responsibilities, structure, authority, or functionality
of the Budget Service of the Department of
Education, relative to the organization and
operation of the Budget Service as in effect
on January 1, 2018: Provided further, That
none of the funds provided by this Act may
be used to support a number of non-career
employees that is more than the number of
non-career employees as of December 31,
2022: Provided further, That the Department
of Education shall support staffing levels
necessary to fulfill its statutory responsibilities including carrying out programs,
projects, and activities funded in this title of
this Act in a timely manner.
OFFICE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS

For expenses necessary for the Office for
Civil Rights, as authorized by section 203 of
the Department of Education Organization
Act, $140,000,000.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

For expenses necessary for the Office of Inspector General, as authorized by section 212
of the Department of Education Organization Act, $67,500,000, of which $3,000,000 shall
remain available through September 30, 2027.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 301. No funds appropriated in this Act
may be used to prevent the implementation
of programs of voluntary prayer and meditation in the public schools.
(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 302. Not to exceed 1 percent of any discretionary funds (pursuant to the Balanced
Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act
of 1985) which are appropriated for the Department of Education in this Act may be
transferred between appropriations, but no
such appropriation shall be increased by
more than 3 percent by any such transfer:
Provided, That the transfer authority granted by this section shall not be used to create
any new program or to fund any project or
activity for which no funds are provided in
this Act: Provided further, That the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate are notified at
least 15 days in advance of any transfer.
SEC. 303. Funds appropriated in this Act
and consolidated for evaluation purposes
under section 8601(c) of the ESEA shall be
available from July 1, 2026, through September 30, 2027.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1230

SEC. 304. (a) An institution of higher education that maintains an endowment fund
supported with funds appropriated for title
III or V of the HEA for fiscal year 2026 may
use the income from that fund to award
scholarships to students, subject to the limitation in section 331(c)(3)(B)(i) of the HEA.
The use of such income for such purposes,
prior to the enactment of this Act, shall be
considered to have been an allowable use of
that income, subject to that limitation.
(b) Subsection (a) shall be in effect until titles III and V of the HEA are reauthorized.
SEC. 305. Section 114(f) of the HEA (20
U.S.C. 1011c(f)) shall be applied by substituting ‘‘2026’’ for ‘‘2021’’.
SEC. 306. Section 458(a)(4) of the HEA (20
U.S.C. 1087h(a)) shall be applied by substituting ‘‘2027’’ for ‘‘2021’’.
SEC. 307. Funds appropriated in this Act
under the heading ‘‘Student Aid Administration’’ may be available for payments for student loan servicing to an institution of higher education that services outstanding Federal Perkins Loans under part E of title IV
of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C.
1087aa et seq.).
SEC. 308. The Secretary may reserve not
more than 0.5 percent from any amount
made available in this Act for an HEA program, except for any amounts made available for subpart 1 of part A of title IV of the
HEA, to carry out rigorous and independent
evaluations and to collect and analyze outcome data for any program authorized by the
HEA: Provided, That no funds made available
in this Act for the ‘‘Student Aid Administration’’ account shall be subject to the reservation under this section: Provided further,
That any funds reserved under this section
shall be available through September 30,
2028: Provided further, That if, under any
other provision of law, funds are authorized
to be reserved or used for evaluation activities with respect to a program or project, the
Secretary may also reserve funds for such
program or project for the purposes described in this section so long as the total
reservation of funds for such program or
project does not exceed any statutory limits
on such reservations: Provided further, That
not later than 30 days prior to the initial obligation of funds reserved under this section,
the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and the
House of Representatives, the Committee on
Health, Education, Labor and Pensions of
the Senate, and the Committee on Education
and Workforce of the House of Representatives a plan that identifies the source and
amount of funds reserved under this section,
the impact on program grantees if funds are
withheld for the purposes of this section, and
the activities to be carried out with such
funds.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 309. Of the amounts appropriated in
this Act for ‘‘Institute of Education
Sciences’’ from amounts available for Program Administration, up to $20,000,000 shall
be available for the Secretary of Education
(‘‘the Secretary’’) to provide support services
to the Institute of Education Sciences (including, but not limited to information technology services, lease or procurement of office space, human resource services, financial management services, financial systems
support, budget formulation and execution,
legal counsel, equal employment opportunity services, physical security, facilities
management, acquisition and contract management, grants administration and policy,
and enterprise risk management): Provided,
That the Secretary shall calculate the actual
amounts obligated and expended for such
support services by using a standard Department of Education methodology for allo-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

cating the cost of all such support services:
Provided further, That the Secretary may
transfer any amounts available for IES support services in excess of actual amounts
needed for IES support services, as so calculated, to the ‘‘Program Administration’’
account from the ‘‘Institute of Education
Sciences’’ account: Provided further, That in
order to address any shortfall between
amounts available for IES support services
and amounts needed for IES support services, as so calculated, the Secretary may
transfer necessary amounts to the ‘‘Institute
of Education Sciences’’ account from the
‘‘Program Administration’’ account: Provided further, That the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate are notified at least 14 days
in advance of any transfer made pursuant to
this section.
(RESCISSION AND TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 310. Of the unobligated balances in the
‘‘Department of Education Nonrecurring Expenses Fund’’ established in section 313 of division H of Public Law 116–260, $160,000,000
are hereby rescinded not later than September 30, 2026: Provided, That from any remaining unobligated balances in such Fund,
the Secretary may transfer up to $60,000,000
to ‘‘Innovation and Improvement’’ to be
merged with funds made available under
such heading for carrying out activities authorized under part C of title IV of the
ESEA.
(RESCISSION)

SEC. 311. Of the funds made available under
the
heading
‘‘Institute
of
Education
Sciences’’ pursuant to section 1101(a)(8) of
the Full-Year Continuing Appropriations
Act, 2025 (division A of Public Law 119–4) for
program administration, $25,000,000 are hereby permanently rescinded not later than
September 30, 2026.
SEC. 312. The Secretary shall award to each
State an amount as required under the applicable provisions of the ESEA, McKinneyVento Homeless Assistance Act, IDEA, Perkins Act, and AEFLA for each formula grant
program to which funds are appropriated in
this Act on the date such funds become
available for obligation.
This title may be cited as the ‘‘Department
of Education Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
TITLE IV
RELATED AGENCIES
COMMITTEE FOR PURCHASE FROM PEOPLE WHO
ARE BLIND OR SEVERELY DISABLED
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the Committee
for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or
Severely Disabled (referred to in this title as
‘‘the Committee’’) established under section
8502 of title 41, United States Code,
$13,124,000: Provided, That in order to authorize any central nonprofit agency designated
pursuant to section 8503(c) of title 41, United
States Code, to perform requirements of the
Committee as prescribed under section 51–3.2
of title 41, Code of Federal Regulations, the
Committee shall enter into a written agreement with any such central nonprofit agency: Provided further, That such agreement
shall contain such auditing, oversight, and
reporting provisions as necessary to implement chapter 85 of title 41, United States
Code: Provided further, That such agreement
shall include the elements listed under the
heading ‘‘Committee For Purchase From
People Who Are Blind or Severely Disabled—
Written Agreement Elements’’ in the explanatory statement described in section 4 of
Public Law 114–113 (in the matter preceding
division A of that consolidated Act): Provided
further, That any such central nonprofit
agency may not charge a fee under section

PO 00000

Frm 00056

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

51–3.5 of title 41, Code of Federal Regulations, prior to executing a written agreement with the Committee: Provided further,
That no less than $3,150,000 shall be available
for the Office of Inspector General.
CORPORATION FOR NATIONAL AND COMMUNITY
SERVICE
OPERATING EXPENSES

For necessary expenses for the Corporation
for National and Community Service (referred to in this title as ‘‘CNCS’’) to carry
out the Domestic Volunteer Service Act of
1973 (referred to in this title as ‘‘1973 Act’’)
and the National and Community Service
Act of 1990 (referred to in this title as ‘‘1990
Act’’), $975,525,000, which shall be for the purposes and in the amounts specified in the
‘‘Final Bill’’ column for Corporation for National and Community Service in the ‘‘Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2026’’ table in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act), notwithstanding sections 198B(b)(3),
198S(g), 501(a)(4)(C), and 501(a)(4)(F) of the
1990 Act: Provided, That of the amounts provided under this heading: (1) up to 1 percent
of program grant funds may be used to defray the costs of conducting grant application reviews, including the use of outside
peer reviewers and electronic management of
the grants cycle; (2) the amounts made available for State Commission Support Grants
shall be available to provide assistance to
State commissions on national and community service, under section 126(a) of the 1990
Act and notwithstanding section 501(a)(5)(B)
of the 1990 Act; (3) of amounts made available for Innovation, Assistance, and Other
Activities, $8,558,000 shall be available for expenses authorized under section 501(a)(4)(F)
of the 1990 Act, which, notwithstanding the
provisions of section 198P shall be awarded
by CNCS on a competitive basis; and (4) of
amounts made available for Innovation, Assistance, and Other Activities, $6,148,000
shall be available to carry out sections 198(k)
and 198(i) of the 1990 Act: Provided further,
That for the purposes of carrying out the
1990 Act, satisfying the requirements in section 122(c)(1)(D) may include a determination
of need by the local community: Provided
further, That CNCS shall award to each State
their allotted amount under AmeriCorps
State and National formula grants no later
than April 1, 2026 and to each state their allotted amount under State Service Commission Support Grants and State Commission
Investment Fund Grants no later than June
1, 2026: Provided further, That the Corporation shall support staffing levels necessary
to fulfill its statutory responsibilities including carrying out programs, projects, and
activities funded in this title of this Act in
a timely manner.
PAYMENT TO THE NATIONAL SERVICE TRUST
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For payment to the National Service Trust
established under subtitle D of title I of the
1990 Act, $180,000,000, to remain available
until expended: Provided, That CNCS may
transfer additional funds from the amount
provided within ‘‘Operating Expenses’’ allocated to grants under subtitle C of title I of
the 1990 Act to the National Service Trust
upon determination that such transfer is
necessary to support the activities of national service participants and after notice
is transmitted to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate: Provided further, That
amounts appropriated for or transferred to
the National Service Trust may be invested
under section 145(b) of the 1990 Act without
regard to the requirement to apportion funds
under 31 U.S.C. 1513(b).

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of administration
as provided under section 501(a)(5) of the 1990
Act and under section 504(a) of the 1973 Act,
including payment of salaries, authorized
travel, hire of passenger motor vehicles, the
rental of conference rooms in the District of
Columbia, the employment of experts and
consultants authorized under 5 U.S.C. 3109,
and not to exceed $2,500 for official reception
and representation expenses, $89,686,000.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the Inspector General Act of 1978, $8,595,000, of which
$1,000,000 shall be available until expended.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

SEC. 401. CNCS shall make any significant
changes to program requirements, service
delivery or policy only through public notice
and comment rulemaking. For fiscal year
2026, during any grant selection process, an
officer or employee of CNCS shall not knowingly disclose any covered grant selection information regarding such selection, directly
or indirectly, to any person other than an officer or employee of CNCS that is authorized
by CNCS to receive such information.
SEC. 402. AmeriCorps programs receiving
grants under the National Service Trust program shall meet an overall minimum share
requirement of 24 percent for the first 3
years that they receive AmeriCorps funding,
and thereafter shall meet the overall minimum share requirement as provided in section 2521.60 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations, without regard to the operating
costs match requirement in section 121(e) or
the member support Federal share limitations in section 140 of the 1990 Act, and subject to partial waiver consistent with section
2521.70 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations.
SEC. 403. Donations made to CNCS under
section 196 of the 1990 Act for the purposes of
financing programs and operations under titles I and II of the 1973 Act or subtitle B, C,
D, or E of title I of the 1990 Act shall be used
to supplement and not supplant current programs and operations.
SEC. 404. In addition to the requirements in
section 146(a) of the 1990 Act, use of an educational award for the purpose described in
section 148(a)(4) shall be limited to individuals who are veterans as defined under section 101 of the Act.
SEC. 405. For the purpose of carrying out
section 189D of the 1990 Act—
(1) entities described in paragraph (a) of
such section shall be considered ‘‘qualified
entities’’ under section 3 of the National
Child Protection Act of 1993 (‘‘NCPA’’);
(2) individuals described in such section
shall be considered ‘‘volunteers’’ under section 3 of NCPA; and
(3) State Commissions on National and
Community Service established pursuant to
section 178 of the 1990 Act, are authorized to
receive criminal history record information,
consistent with Public Law 92–544.
SEC. 406. Notwithstanding sections 139(b),
146, and 147 of the 1990 Act, an individual who
successfully completes a term of service of
not less than 1,200 hours during a period of
not more than one year may receive a national service education award having a
value of 70 percent of the value of a national
service education award determined under
section 147(a) of the Act.
SEC. 407. Section 148(f)(2)(A)(i) of the 1990
Act shall be applied by substituting ‘‘an approved national service position’’ for ‘‘a national service program that receives grants
under subtitle C’’.
SEC. 408. In any case where a participant of
a position eligible for an educational award

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1231

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

described in subtitle D of title I of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42
U.S.C. 12601 et seq.) was required to exit the
position early at the direction of the Corporation for National and Community Service and due to circumstances outside the
control of the individual, such as a lapse in
availability of Federal appropriations, or
termination of their position, or the applicable program grant or agreement under the
national service laws is released from completing the required term of service for such
position, the Chief Executive Officer of the
Corporation for National and Community
Service may—
(1) deem such individual as having met the
minimum requirements of the position or
program for purposes of section 139(c)(1) of
the 1990 Act; and
(2) notwithstanding section 139(c)(2)(B) of
the 1990 Act, award the individual a prorated value of the educational award that
corresponds to the quantity of the term of
service actually completed by the individual
without regard to whether such individual
has completed at least 15 percent of their
term of service as required under section
139(c) of the 1990 Act.
FEDERAL MEDIATION AND CONCILIATION
SERVICE
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (‘‘Service’’)
to carry out the functions vested in it by the
Labor-Management Relations Act, 1947, including hire of passenger motor vehicles; for
expenses necessary for the Labor-Management Cooperation Act of 1978; and for expenses necessary for the Service to carry out
the functions vested in it by the Civil Service Reform Act, $48,705,000: Provided, That
notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 3302, fees charged,
up to full-cost recovery, for special training
activities and other conflict resolution services and technical assistance, including
those provided to foreign governments and
international organizations, and for arbitration services shall be credited to and merged
with this account, and shall remain available
until expended: Provided further, That fees
for arbitration services shall be available
only for education, training, and professional
development of the agency workforce: Provided further, That the Director of the Service is authorized to accept and use on behalf
of the United States gifts of services and
real, personal, or other property in the aid of
any projects or functions within the Director’s jurisdiction.
FEDERAL MINE SAFETY AND HEALTH REVIEW
COMMISSION

the following Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) clauses will apply: FAR 52.232–39
and FAR 52.233–4 (or a successor clause).
MEDICARE PAYMENT ADVISORY COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary to carry out section 1805 of the Social Security Act,
$14,673,000, to be transferred to this appropriation from the Federal Hospital Insurance
Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary
Medical Insurance Trust Fund: Provided,
That in fiscal year 2026 and thereafter, for all
contracts for goods and services to which the
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission is a
party, the following Federal Acquisition
Regulation (FAR) clauses will apply: FAR
52.232–39 and FAR 52.233–4 (or a successor
clause).
NATIONAL COUNCIL ON DISABILITY
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the National
Council on Disability as authorized by title
IV of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973,
$3,850,000.
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the National
Labor Relations Board to carry out the functions vested in it by the Labor-Management
Relations Act, 1947, and other laws,
$294,224,000: Provided, That no part of this appropriation shall be available to organize or
assist in organizing agricultural laborers or
used in connection with investigations, hearings, directives, or orders concerning bargaining units composed of agricultural laborers as referred to in section 2(3) of the Act
of July 5, 1935, and as amended by the LaborManagement Relations Act, 1947, and as defined in section 3(f) of the Act of June 25,
1938, and including in said definition employees engaged in the maintenance and operation of ditches, canals, reservoirs, and waterways when maintained or operated on a
mutual, nonprofit basis and at least 95 percent of the water stored or supplied thereby
is used for farming purposes.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISION

SEC. 409. None of the funds provided by this
Act or previous Acts making appropriations
for the National Labor Relations Board may
be used to issue any new administrative directive or regulation that would provide employees any means of voting through any
electronic means in an election to determine
a representative for the purposes of collective bargaining.
NATIONAL MEDIATION BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the Federal
Mine Safety and Health Review Commission,
$18,012,000.
INSTITUTE OF MUSEUM AND LIBRARY SERVICES
OFFICE OF MUSEUM AND LIBRARY SERVICES:
GRANTS AND ADMINISTRATION

For carrying out the Museum and Library
Services Act of 1996 and the National Museum of African American History and Culture Act, $291,800,000, which shall be for the
purposes and in the amounts specified in the
table under this heading in the explanatory
statement in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act).
MEDICAID AND CHIP PAYMENT AND ACCESS
COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary to carry out section 1900 of the Social Security Act,
$9,405,000: Provided, That in fiscal year 2026
and thereafter, for all contracts for goods
and services to which the Medicaid and CHIP
Payment and Access Commission is a party,

PO 00000

Frm 00057

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

For expenses necessary to carry out the
provisions of the Railway Labor Act, including emergency boards appointed by the
President, $15,113,000.
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH REVIEW
COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission, $14,449,000.
RAILROAD RETIREMENT BOARD
DUAL BENEFITS PAYMENTS ACCOUNT

For payment to the Dual Benefits Payments Account, authorized under section
15(d) of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974,
$5,000,000, which shall include amounts becoming available in fiscal year 2026 pursuant
to section 224(c)(1)(B) of Public Law 98–76;
and in addition, an amount, not to exceed 2
percent of the amount provided herein, shall
be available proportional to the amount by
which the product of recipients and the average benefit received exceeds the amount

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1232

available for payment of vested dual benefits: Provided, That the total amount provided herein shall be credited in 12 approximately equal amounts on the first day of
each month in the fiscal year.
FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO THE RAILROAD
RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS

For payment to the accounts established
in the Treasury for the payment of benefits
under the Railroad Retirement Act for interest earned on unnegotiated checks, $150,000,
to remain available through September 30,
2027, which shall be the maximum amount
available for payment pursuant to section
417 of Public Law 98–76.
LIMITATION ON ADMINISTRATION

For necessary expenses for the Railroad
Retirement Board (‘‘Board’’) for administration of the Railroad Retirement Act and the
Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act,
$127,000,000, to be derived in such amounts as
determined by the Board from the railroad
retirement accounts and from moneys credited to the railroad unemployment insurance
administration fund: Provided, That notwithstanding section 7(b)(9) of the Railroad Retirement Act this limitation may be used to
hire attorneys only through the excepted
service: Provided further, That the previous
proviso shall not change the status under
Federal employment laws of any attorney
hired by the Railroad Retirement Board
prior to January 1, 2013: Provided further,
That notwithstanding section 7(b)(9) of the
Railroad Retirement Act, this limitation
may be used to hire students attending
qualifying educational institutions or individuals who have recently completed qualifying educational programs using current excepted hiring authorities established by the
Office of Personnel Management.
LIMITATION ON THE OFFICE OF INSPECTOR
GENERAL

For expenses necessary for the Office of Inspector General for audit, investigatory and
review activities, as authorized by the Inspector General Act of 1978, not more than
$14,000,000, to be derived from the railroad retirement accounts and railroad unemployment insurance account.
SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
PAYMENTS TO SOCIAL SECURITY TRUST FUNDS

For payment to the Federal Old-Age and
Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund, as provided under sections 201(m) and 1131(b)(2) of
the Social Security Act, $15,000,000.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY INCOME PROGRAM

For carrying out titles XI and XVI of the
Social Security Act, section 401 of Public
Law 92–603, section 212 of Public Law 93–66,
as amended, and section 405 of Public Law
95–216, including payment to the Social Security trust funds for administrative expenses
incurred pursuant to section 201(g)(1) of the
Social Security Act, $49,452,282,000, to remain
available until expended: Provided, That any
portion of the funds provided to a State in
the current fiscal year and not obligated by
the State during that year shall be returned
to the Treasury: Provided further, That not
more than $91,000,000 shall be available for
research and demonstrations under sections
1110, 1115, and 1144 of the Social Security
Act, and remain available through September 30, 2028.
For making, after June 15 of the current
fiscal year, benefit payments to individuals
under title XVI of the Social Security Act,
for unanticipated costs incurred for the current fiscal year, such sums as may be necessary.
For making benefit payments under title
XVI of the Social Security Act for the first
quarter of fiscal year 2027, $23,500,000,000, to
remain available until expended.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

LIMITATION ON ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses, including the hire
and purchase of two passenger motor vehicles, and not to exceed $20,000 for official reception and representation expenses, not
more than $14,671,978,000 may be expended, as
authorized by section 201(g)(1) of the Social
Security Act, from any one or all of the
trust funds referred to in such section: Provided, That not less than $2,700,000 shall be
for the Social Security Advisory Board: Provided further, That unobligated balances of
funds provided under this paragraph at the
end of fiscal year 2026 not needed for fiscal
year 2026 shall remain available until expended to invest in the Social Security Administration information technology and
telecommunications hardware and software
infrastructure, including related equipment
and non-payroll administrative expenses associated solely with this information technology and telecommunications infrastructure, except unobligated balances of funds
described in the first proviso of this paragraph at the end of fiscal year 2026 not needed for fiscal year 2026 shall remain available
until expended to invest in the Social Security Advisory Board information technology:
Provided further, That the Commissioner of
Social Security shall notify the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate prior to making unobligated balances available under the authority in the previous proviso: Provided further,
That reimbursement to the trust funds under
this heading for expenditures for official
time for employees of the Social Security
Administration pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 7131,
and for facilities or support services for labor
organizations pursuant to policies, regulations, or procedures referred to in section
7135(b) of such title shall be made by the Secretary of the Treasury, with interest, from
amounts in the general fund not otherwise
appropriated, as soon as possible after such
expenditures are made.
From funds provided under the first paragraph under this heading, not more than
$2,397,000,000, to remain available through
March 31, 2027, is for the costs associated
with continuing disability reviews under titles II and XVI of the Social Security Act,
including work-related continuing disability
reviews to determine whether earnings derived from services demonstrate an individual’s ability to engage in substantial gainful
activity, for the cost associated with conducting redeterminations of eligibility under
title XVI of the Social Security Act, for the
cost of co-operative disability investigation
units, and for the cost associated with the
prosecution of fraud in the programs and operations of the Social Security Administration by Special Assistant United States Attorneys: Provided, That, of such amount,
$273,000,000 is provided to meet the terms of
a concurrent resolution on the budget and
$2,124,000,000 is additional new budget authority specified for purposes of a concurrent
resolution on the budget: Provided further,
That, of the additional new budget authority
described in the preceding proviso, up to
$24,600,000 may be transferred to the ‘‘Office
of Inspector General’’, Social Security Administration, for the cost of jointly operated
co-operative disability investigation units:
Provided further, That such transfer authority is in addition to any other transfer authority provided by law: Provided further,
That the Commissioner shall provide to the
Congress (at the conclusion of the fiscal
year) a report on the obligation and expenditure of these funds, similar to the reports
that were required by section 103(d)(2) of
Public Law 104–121 for fiscal years 1996
through 2002: Provided further, That none of

PO 00000

Frm 00058

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

the funds described in this paragraph shall
be available for transfer or reprogramming
except as specified in this paragraph.
In addition, $170,000,000 to be derived from
administration fees in excess of $5.00 per supplementary payment collected pursuant to
section 1616(d) of the Social Security Act or
section 212(b)(3) of Public Law 93–66, which
shall remain available until expended: Provided, That to the extent that the amounts
collected pursuant to such sections in fiscal
year 2026 exceed $170,000,000, the amounts
shall be available in fiscal year 2027 only to
the extent provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
In addition, up to $1,000,000 to be derived
from fees collected pursuant to section 303(c)
of the Social Security Protection Act, which
shall remain available until expended.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For expenses necessary for the Office of Inspector General in carrying out the provisions of the Inspector General Act of 1978,
$32,000,000, together with not to exceed
$82,665,000, to be transferred and expended as
authorized by section 201(g)(1) of the Social
Security Act from the Federal Old-Age and
Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund: Provided, That $2,000,000 shall remain available
until expended for information technology
modernization, including related hardware
and software infrastructure and equipment,
and for administrative expenses directly associated with information technology modernization.
In addition, an amount not to exceed 3 percent of the total provided in this appropriation may be transferred from the ‘‘Limitation on Administrative Expenses’’, Social
Security Administration, to be merged with
this account, to be available for the time and
purposes for which this account is available:
Provided, That notice of such transfers shall
be transmitted promptly to the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate at least 15 days in advance of any transfer.
TITLE V
GENERAL PROVISIONS
(TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 501. The Secretaries of Labor, Health
and Human Services, and Education are authorized to transfer unexpended balances of
prior appropriations to accounts corresponding to current appropriations provided in this Act. Such transferred balances
shall be used for the same purpose, and for
the same periods of time, for which they
were originally appropriated.
SEC. 502. No part of any appropriation contained in this Act shall remain available for
obligation beyond the current fiscal year unless expressly so provided herein.
SEC. 503. (a) No part of any appropriation
contained in this Act or transferred pursuant
to section 4002 of Public Law 111–148 shall be
used, other than for normal and recognized
executive-legislative relationships, for publicity or propaganda purposes, for the preparation, distribution, or use of any kit, pamphlet, booklet, publication, electronic communication, radio, television, or video presentation designed to support or defeat the
enactment of legislation before the Congress
or any State or local legislature or legislative body, except in presentation to the Congress or any State or local legislature itself,
or designed to support or defeat any proposed or pending regulation, administrative
action, or order issued by the executive
branch of any State or local government, except in presentation to the executive branch
of any State or local government itself.
(b) No part of any appropriation contained
in this Act or transferred pursuant to section

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

4002 of Public Law 111–148 shall be used to
pay the salary or expenses of any grant or
contract recipient, or agent acting for such
recipient, related to any activity designed to
influence the enactment of legislation, appropriations, regulation, administrative action, or Executive order proposed or pending
before the Congress or any State government, State legislature or local legislature
or legislative body, other than for normal
and recognized executive-legislative relationships or participation by an agency or
officer of a State, local or Tribal government
in policymaking and administrative processes within the executive branch of that
government.
(c) The prohibitions in subsections (a) and
(b) shall include any activity to advocate or
promote any proposed, pending or future
Federal, State or local tax increase, or any
proposed, pending, or future requirement or
restriction on any legal consumer product,
including its sale or marketing, including
but not limited to the advocacy or promotion of gun control.
SEC. 504. The Secretaries of Labor and Education are authorized to make available not
to exceed $28,000 and $20,000, respectively,
from funds available for salaries and expenses under titles I and III, respectively, for
official reception and representation expenses; the Director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service is authorized
to make available for official reception and
representation expenses not to exceed $5,000
from the funds available for ‘‘Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, Salaries and
Expenses’’; and the Chairman of the National
Mediation Board is authorized to make
available for official reception and representation expenses not to exceed $5,000 from
funds available for ‘‘National Mediation
Board, Salaries and Expenses’’.
SEC. 505. When issuing statements, press
releases, requests for proposals, bid solicitations and other documents describing
projects or programs funded in whole or in
part with Federal money, all grantees receiving Federal funds included in this Act,
including but not limited to State and local
governments and recipients of Federal research grants, shall clearly state—
(1) the percentage of the total costs of the
program or project which will be financed
with Federal money;
(2) the dollar amount of Federal funds for
the project or program; and
(3) percentage and dollar amount of the
total costs of the project or program that
will be financed by non-governmental
sources.
SEC. 506. (a) None of the funds appropriated
in this Act, and none of the funds in any
trust fund to which funds are appropriated in
this Act, shall be expended for any abortion.
(b) None of the funds appropriated in this
Act, and none of the funds in any trust fund
to which funds are appropriated in this Act,
shall be expended for health benefits coverage that includes coverage of abortion.
(c) The term ‘‘health benefits coverage’’
means the package of services covered by a
managed care provider or organization pursuant to a contract or other arrangement.
SEC. 507. (a) The limitations established in
the preceding section shall not apply to an
abortion—
(1) if the pregnancy is the result of an act
of rape or incest; or
(2) in the case where a woman suffers from
a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness, including a life-endangering
physical condition caused by or arising from
the pregnancy itself, that would, as certified
by a physician, place the woman in danger of
death unless an abortion is performed.
(b) Nothing in the preceding section shall
be construed as prohibiting the expenditure

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1233

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

by a State, locality, entity, or private person
of State, local, or private funds (other than
a State’s or locality’s contribution of Medicaid matching funds).
(c) Nothing in the preceding section shall
be construed as restricting the ability of any
managed care provider from offering abortion coverage or the ability of a State or locality to contract separately with such a
provider for such coverage with State funds
(other than a State’s or locality’s contribution of Medicaid matching funds).
(d)(1) None of the funds made available in
this Act may be made available to a Federal
agency or program, or to a State or local
government, if such agency, program, or government subjects any institutional or individual health care entity to discrimination
on the basis that the health care entity does
not provide, pay for, provide coverage of, or
refer for abortions.
(2) In this subsection, the term ‘‘health
care entity’’ includes an individual physician
or other health care professional, a hospital,
a provider-sponsored organization, a health
maintenance organization, a health insurance plan, or any other kind of health care
facility, organization, or plan.
SEC. 508. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used for—
(1) the creation of a human embryo or embryos for research purposes; or
(2) research in which a human embryo or
embryos are destroyed, discarded, or knowingly subjected to risk of injury or death
greater than that allowed for research on
fetuses in utero under 45 CFR 46.204(b) and
section 498(b) of the Public Health Service
Act (42 U.S.C. 289g(b)).
(b) For purposes of this section, the term
‘‘human embryo or embryos’’ includes any
organism, not protected as a human subject
under 45 CFR 46 as of the date of the enactment of this Act, that is derived by fertilization, parthenogenesis, cloning, or any other
means from one or more human gametes or
human diploid cells.
SEC. 509. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used for any activity
that promotes the legalization of any drug or
other substance included in schedule I of the
schedules of controlled substances established under section 202 of the Controlled
Substances Act except for normal and recognized executive-congressional communications.
(b) The limitation in subsection (a) shall
not apply when there is significant medical
evidence of a therapeutic advantage to the
use of such drug or other substance or that
federally sponsored clinical trials are being
conducted to determine therapeutic advantage.
SEC. 510. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used to promulgate or
adopt any final standard under section
1173(b) of the Social Security Act providing
for, or providing for the assignment of, a
unique health identifier for an individual
(except in an individual’s capacity as an employer or a health care provider), until legislation is enacted specifically approving the
standard.
SEC. 511. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be obligated or expended to
enter into or renew a contract with an entity
if—
(1) such entity is otherwise a contractor
with the United States and is subject to the
requirement in 38 U.S.C. 4212(d) regarding
submission of an annual report to the Secretary of Labor concerning employment of
certain veterans; and
(2) such entity has not submitted a report
as required by that section for the most recent year for which such requirement was
applicable to such entity.
SEC. 512. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be transferred to any depart-

PO 00000

Frm 00059

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ment, agency, or instrumentality of the
United States Government, except pursuant
to a transfer made by, or transfer authority
provided in, this Act or any other appropriation Act.
SEC. 513. None of the funds made available
by this Act to carry out the Library Services
and Technology Act may be made available
to any library covered by paragraph (1) of
section 224(f) of such Act, as amended by the
Children’s Internet Protection Act, unless
such library has made the certifications required by paragraph (4) of such section.
SEC. 514. (a) None of the funds provided
under this Act, or provided under previous
appropriations Acts to the agencies funded
by this Act that remain available for obligation or expenditure in fiscal year 2026, or
provided from any accounts in the Treasury
of the United States derived by the collection of fees available to the agencies funded
by this Act, shall be available for obligation
or expenditure through a reprogramming of
funds that—
(1) creates new programs;
(2) eliminates a program, project, or activity;
(3) increases funds or personnel by any
means for any project or activity for which
funds have been denied or restricted;
(4) relocates an office or employees;
(5) reorganizes or renames offices;
(6) reorganizes programs or activities; or
(7) contracts out or privatizes any functions or activities presently performed by
Federal employees;
unless the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate
are consulted 15 days in advance of such reprogramming or of an announcement of intent relating to such reprogramming, whichever occurs earlier, and are notified in writing 10 days in advance of such reprogramming.
(b) None of the funds provided under this
Act, or provided under previous appropriations Acts to the agencies funded by this Act
that remain available for obligation or expenditure in fiscal year 2026, or provided
from any accounts in the Treasury of the
United States derived by the collection of
fees available to the agencies funded by this
Act, shall be available for obligation or expenditure through a reprogramming of funds
in excess of $500,000 or 10 percent, whichever
is less, that—
(1) augments existing programs, projects
(including construction projects), or activities;
(2) reduces by 10 percent funding for any
existing program, project, or activity, or
numbers of personnel by 10 percent as approved by Congress; or
(3) results from any general savings from a
reduction in personnel which would result in
a change in existing programs, activities, or
projects as approved by Congress;
unless the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate
are consulted 15 days in advance of such reprogramming or of an announcement of intent relating to such reprogramming, whichever occurs earlier, and are notified in writing 10 days in advance of such reprogramming.
SEC. 515. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used to request that
a candidate for appointment to a Federal scientific advisory committee disclose the political affiliation or voting history of the
candidate or the position that the candidate
holds with respect to political issues not directly related to and necessary for the work
of the committee involved.
(b) None of the funds made available in
this Act may be used to disseminate information that is deliberately false or misleading.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1234

SEC. 516. Within 45 days of enactment of
this Act, each department and related agency funded through this Act shall submit an
operating plan that details at the program,
project, and activity level any funding allocations for fiscal year 2026 that are different
than those specified in this Act, the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the
matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act) or the fiscal year 2026 budget request.
SEC. 517. The Secretaries of Labor, Health
and Human Services, and Education shall
each prepare and submit to the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate a report on the number and amount of contracts, grants, and cooperative agreements exceeding $500,000, individually or in total for a particular
project, activity, or programmatic initiative, in value and awarded by the Department on a non-competitive basis during each
quarter of fiscal year 2026, but not to include
grants awarded on a formula basis or directed by law. Such report shall include the
name of the contractor or grantee, the
amount of funding, the governmental purpose, including a justification for issuing the
award on a non-competitive basis. Such report shall be transmitted to the Committees
within 30 days after the end of the quarter
for which the report is submitted.
SEC. 518. None of the funds appropriated in
this Act shall be expended or obligated by
the Commissioner of Social Security, for
purposes of administering Social Security
benefit payments under title II of the Social
Security Act, to process any claim for credit
for a quarter of coverage based on work performed under a social security account number that is not the claimant’s number and
the performance of such work under such
number has formed the basis for a conviction
of the claimant of a violation of section
208(a)(6) or (7) of the Social Security Act.
SEC. 519. None of the funds appropriated by
this Act may be used by the Commissioner of
Social Security or the Social Security Administration to pay the compensation of employees of the Social Security Administration to administer Social Security benefit
payments, under any agreement between the
United States and Mexico establishing totalization arrangements between the social security system established by title II of the
Social Security Act and the social security
system of Mexico, which would not otherwise
be payable but for such agreement.
SEC. 520. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used to maintain or
establish a computer network unless such
network blocks the viewing, downloading,
and exchanging of pornography.
(b) Nothing in subsection (a) shall limit
the use of funds necessary for any Federal,
State, Tribal, or local law enforcement agency or any other entity carrying out criminal
investigations, prosecution, or adjudication
activities.
SEC. 521. For purposes of carrying out Executive Order 13589, Office of Management
and Budget Memorandum M–12–12 dated May
11, 2012, and requirements contained in the
annual appropriations bills relating to conference attendance and expenditures:
(1) the operating divisions of HHS shall be
considered independent agencies; and
(2) attendance at and support for scientific
conferences shall be tabulated separately
from and not included in agency totals.
SEC. 522. Federal agencies funded under
this Act shall clearly state within the text,
audio, or video used for advertising or educational purposes, including emails or Internet postings, that the communication is
printed, published, or produced and disseminated at United States taxpayer expense.
The funds used by a Federal agency to carry

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

out this requirement shall be derived from
amounts made available to the agency for
advertising or other communications regarding the programs and activities of the agency.
SEC. 523. Not later than 30 days after the
end of each calendar quarter, beginning with
the first month of fiscal year 2026 the Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services and Education and the Social Security
Administration shall provide the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and Senate a report on the status of balances of appropriations: Provided,
That for balances that are unobligated and
uncommitted, committed, and obligated but
unexpended, the monthly reports shall separately identify the amounts attributable to
each source year of appropriation (beginning
with fiscal year 2012, or, to the extent feasible, earlier fiscal years) from which balances were derived.
SEC. 524. The Departments of Labor, Health
and Human Services, and Education and the
Corporation for National and Community
Service shall notify the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate not less than 3 full business
days prior to announcing or providing notice
of—
(1) any new or non-competing continuation
grant, including supplements, issued at the
discretion of such Departments (other than
emergency response grants at any time of
the year or for grant awards made during the
last 10 business days of the fiscal year, or if
applicable, of the program year); and
(2) the termination or non-continuation of
any grant, including a short description of
the reason for the termination or non-continuation.
SEC. 525. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, no funds appropriated in
this Act shall be used to purchase sterile
needles or syringes for the hypodermic injection of any illegal drug: Provided, That such
limitation does not apply to the use of funds
for elements of a program other than making
such purchases if the relevant State or local
health department, in consultation with the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
determines that the State or local jurisdiction, as applicable, is experiencing, or is at
risk for, a significant increase in hepatitis
infections or an HIV outbreak due to injection drug use, and such program is operating
in accordance with State and local law.
SEC. 526. Each department and related
agency funded through this Act shall provide
answers to questions submitted for the
record by members of the Committee within
45 business days after receipt.
SEC. 527. Of amounts deposited in the Child
Enrollment Contingency Fund under section
2104(n)(2) of the Social Security Act and the
income derived from investment of those
funds pursuant to section 2104(n)(2)(C) of
that Act, $12,340,000,000 shall not be available
for obligation in this fiscal year.
(RESCISSION)

SEC. 528. Of the unobligated balances of
amounts
made
available
in
section
10301(1)(A)(iii)
of
Public
Law
117–169,
$11,661,000,000 are hereby rescinded.
SEC. 529. (a) This section applies to: (1) the
Administration for Children and Families in
the Department of Health and Human Services; and (2) the Chief Evaluation Office and
the statistical-related cooperative and interagency agreements and contracting activities of the Bureau of Labor Statistics in the
Department of Labor.
(b) Amounts made available under this Act
which are either appropriated, allocated, advanced on a reimbursable basis, or transferred to the functions and organizations
identified in subsection (a) for research,

PO 00000

Frm 00060

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

evaluation, or statistical purposes shall be
available for obligation through September
30, 2030: Provided, That when an office referenced in subsection (a) receives research
and evaluation funding from multiple appropriations, such offices may use a single
Treasury account for such activities, with
funding advanced on a reimbursable basis.
(c) Amounts referenced in subsection (b)
that are unexpended at the time of completion of a contract, grant, or cooperative
agreement may be deobligated and shall immediately become available and may be reobligated in that fiscal year or the subsequent fiscal year for the research, evaluation, or statistical purposes for which such
amounts are available.
(RESCISSION)

SEC. 530. Of the unobligated balances of
funds made available by sections 2023, 2206,
2301, 2302, 2303, 2401, 2402, 2403, 2404, 2501, 2502,
2601, 2602, 2603, 2605, 2701, 2702, 2703, 2704, 2705,
2706, 2707, 2708, 2709, 2710, 2711, 2712, 2713, 2904,
2912, 3101, and 9911 of the American Rescue
Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law 117–2),
$2,000,000,000 are hereby rescinded: Provided,
That not later than 60 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of
Health and Human Services shall submit to
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate a
report specifying the unobligated balances
rescinded pursuant to this section by both
account and amount from each applicable
appropriation in Public Law 117–2.
This division may be cited as the ‘‘Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services,
and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
DIVISION D—TRANSPORTATION, HOUSING
AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED
AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS
ACT, 2026
TITLE I
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
SALARIES AND EXPENSES
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of the Office of the
Secretary, $187,344,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2027: Provided, That of
the sums appropriated under this heading—
(1) $3,764,000 shall be available for the immediate Office of the Secretary;
(2) $1,348,000 shall be available for the immediate Office of the Deputy Secretary;
(3) $27,780,000 shall be available for the Office of the General Counsel: Provided, That
the Secretary of Transportation (referred to
in this title as ‘‘the Secretary’’) shall report
to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations on the implementation of all
sections under title V of the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 (Public Law 118–63) not
later than 90 days after enactment of this
Act;
(4) $21,358,000 shall be available for the Office of the Under Secretary of Transportation for Policy, of which $5,000,000 is for
the Office for Multimodal Freight Infrastructure and Policy: Provided, That the Secretary must obtain reprogramming approval
from the House and Senate Committees on
Appropriations under section 405 of this Act
prior to executing the authorities of section
118(g)(2)–(3) of title 49, United States Code;
(5) $21,505,000 shall be available for the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Budget
and Programs;
(6) $3,807,000 shall be available for the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Governmental Affairs;
(7) $16,181,000 shall be available for the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration;

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

(8) $5,664,000 shall be available for the Office of Public Affairs and Public Engagement;
(9) $2,332,000 shall be available for the Office of the Executive Secretariat;
(10) $19,388,000 shall be available for the Office of Intelligence, Security, and Emergency
Response;
(11) $1,707,000 shall be available for the Office of the Chief Information Officer;
(12) $1,517,000 shall be available for the Office of Tribal Government Affairs; and
(13) $60,993,000 shall be available for shared
services as authorized in section 327 of title
49, United States Code, for the Office of the
Secretary that would otherwise be provided
by the Working Capital Fund, in addition to
amounts otherwise available for such purposes:
Provided further, That the Secretary is authorized to transfer funds appropriated under
this heading among the purposes specified in
the first proviso under this heading: Provided
further, That such transfers combined shall
not increase or decrease the amount appropriated for any purpose specified in the first
proviso under this heading by more than 7
percent: Provided further, That notice of any
change in funding greater than 7 percent
shall be submitted for approval to the House
and Senate Committees on Appropriations
not later than 7 business days in advance of
any such change: Provided further, That not
to exceed $70,000 shall be for allocation within the Department for official reception and
representation expenses as the Secretary
may determine: Provided further, That notwithstanding any other provision of law,
there may be credited to this appropriation
up to $2,500,000 in funds received in user fees.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY

For necessary expenses related to the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Research
and Technology, $74,471,000, of which
$56,000,000 shall remain available until expended: Provided, That of such amounts that
are available until expended, $9,000,000 shall
be for necessary expenses of the Advanced
Research Projects Agency—Infrastructure
(ARPA–I) as authorized by section 119 of
title 49, United States Code: Provided further,
That within the funds made available under
the preceding proviso, not less than $7,000,000
shall be available for research on durability,
resiliency, and sustainability of bridges and
other infrastructure and shall be directed to
an accredited university of higher education
in the northeast United States that has experience leading a regional university transportation center and a proven record of developing, patenting, deploying, and commercializing innovative composite materials and
technologies for bridge and other transportation applications, as well as conducting research and developing prototypes using very
large-scale polymer-based additive manufacturing: Provided further, That of such
amounts that are available until expended,
$4,000,000 shall be for the Highly Automated
Systems Safety Center of Excellence as authorized in section 105 of title I of division H
of the Further Consolidated Appropriations
Act, 2020 (Public Law 116–94): Provided further, That of such amounts that are available
until expended, $3,000,000 shall be for activities relating to complementary positioning,
navigation, and timing technologies demonstrations as identified in the U.S. Department of Transportation Complementary PNT
Action Plan (March 2024): Provided further,
That of such amounts that are available
until expended, $10,000,000 shall be for the
drone infrastructure inspection grant program authorized in section 912 of Public Law
118–63: Provided further, That, notwithstanding subsection (g)(2) of such section 912,
amounts made available under section 106(k)

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1235

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

of title 49, United States Code, shall not be
available to carry out such program: Provided further, That of amounts made available for the drone infrastructure inspection
grant program, $1,000,000 shall be available
for administrative expenses: Provided further,
That of such amounts that are available
until expended, $30,000,000 shall be for research on transportation resilience and nuclear technology and shall be directed, without competition, to a university of higher
education, as defined under 20 U.S.C.
1067(q)(1), that has a nuclear engineering program and experience as a consortium member of a university transportation center
that conducts research on transportation cybersecurity and resiliency: Provided further,
That there may be credited to this appropriation, to be available until expended,
funds received from States, counties, municipalities, other public authorities, and
private sources for expenses incurred for
training: Provided further, That any reference
in law, regulation, judicial proceedings, or
elsewhere to the Research and Innovative
Technology Administration shall continue to
be deemed to be a reference to the Office of
the Assistant Secretary for Research and
Technology of the Department of Transportation.
NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses to carry out a local
and regional project assistance grant program under section 6702 of title 49, United
States Code, $145,000,000, to remain available
until expended: Provided, That section
6702(f)(2) of title 49, United States Code, shall
not apply to amounts made available under
this heading in this Act: Provided further,
That of the amounts made available under
this heading in this Act, not less than 5 percent shall be awarded to projects in historically disadvantaged communities or areas of
persistent poverty as defined under section
6702(a)(1) of title 49, United States Code: Provided further, That grants awarded under this
heading in this Act for eligible projects for
planning, preparation, or design shall not be
subject to a minimum grant size: Provided
further, That in distributing amounts made
available under this heading in this Act, the
Secretary shall take such measures so as to
ensure an equitable geographic distribution
of funds, an appropriate balance in addressing the needs of urban and rural areas, including Tribal areas, and the investment in a
variety of transportation modes: Provided
further, That for amounts made available
under this heading in this Act, the Secretary
shall give priority to projects that require a
contribution of Federal funds in order to
complete an overall financing package: Provided further, That section 6702(f)(1) of title
49, United States Code, shall not apply to
amounts made available under this heading
in this Act: Provided further, That of the
amounts awarded under this heading in this
Act, not more than 50 percent shall be allocated for eligible projects located in rural
areas and not more than 50 percent shall be
allocated for eligible projects located in urbanized areas: Provided further, That for the
purpose of determining if an award for planning, preparation, or design under this heading in this Act is an urban award, the project
location is the location of the project being
planned, prepared, or designed: Provided further, That the Secretary may retain up to 2
percent of the amounts made available under
this heading in this Act, and may transfer
portions of such amounts to the Administrators of the Federal Aviation Administration,
the Federal Highway Administration, the
Federal Transit Administration, the Federal
Railroad Administration and the Maritime
Administration to fund the award and over-

PO 00000

Frm 00061

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

sight of grants and credit assistance made
under the program authorized under section
6702 of title 49, United States Code: Provided
further, That for amounts made available
under this heading in this Act, the Secretary
shall consider and award projects based solely on the selection criteria as identified
under section 6702(d)(3) and (d)(4) of title 49,
United States Code.
NATIONAL SURFACE TRANSPORTATION AND
INNOVATIVE FINANCE BUREAU

For necessary expenses of the National
Surface Transportation and Innovative Finance Bureau as authorized by 49 U.S.C. 116,
$9,250,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That the Secretary may
collect and spend fees, as authorized by title
23, United States Code, to cover the costs of
services of expert firms, including counsel,
in the field of municipal and project finance
to assist in the underwriting and servicing of
Federal credit instruments and all or a portion of the costs to the Federal Government
of servicing such credit instruments: Provided further, That such fees are available
until expended to pay for such costs: Provided further, That such amounts are in addition to other amounts made available for
such purposes and are not subject to any obligation limitation or the limitation on administrative expenses under section 608 of
title 23, United States Code.
RURAL AND TRIBAL INFRASTRUCTURE
ADVANCEMENT

For necessary expenses to carry out rural
and Tribal infrastructure advancement as
authorized in section 21205 of Public Law 117–
58, $10,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2028: Provided, That the Secretary
may enter into cooperative agreements with
philanthropic entities, non-profit organizations, other Federal agencies, State or local
governments and their agencies, Indian
Tribes, or other technical assistance providers, to provide such technical assistance,
planning, and capacity building to State,
local, or Tribal governments, United States
territories, metropolitan planning organizations, transit agencies, or other political
subdivisions of State or local governments.
RAILROAD REHABILITATION AND IMPROVEMENT
FINANCING PROGRAM

The Secretary is authorized to issue direct
loans and loan guarantees pursuant to chapter 224 of title 49, United States Code, and
such authority shall exist as long as any
such direct loan or loan guarantee is outstanding.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT CAPITAL

For necessary expenses for upgrading and
enhancing the Department of Transportation’s financial systems and re-engineering
business processes, $5,000,000, to remain
available through September 30, 2027.
CYBER SECURITY INITIATIVES

For necessary expenses for cyber security
initiatives, including necessary upgrades to
network and information technology infrastructure, improvement of identity management and authentication capabilities, securing and protecting data, implementation of
Federal cyber security initiatives, and implementation of enhanced security controls
on agency computers and mobile devices,
$60,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
OFFICE OF CIVIL RIGHTS

For necessary expenses of the Office of
Civil Rights, $11,761,000.
TRANSPORTATION PLANNING, RESEARCH, AND
DEVELOPMENT
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses for conducting
transportation planning, research, systems

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1236

development, development activities, and
making grants, $32,043,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That of such
amount, $5,436,000 shall be for necessary expenses of the Interagency Infrastructure Permitting Improvement Center (IIPIC): Provided further, That there may be transferred
to this appropriation, to remain available
until expended, amounts transferred from
other Federal agencies for expenses incurred
under this heading for IIPIC activities not
related to transportation infrastructure: Provided further, That the tools and analysis developed by the IIPIC shall be available to
other Federal agencies for the permitting
and review of major infrastructure projects
not related to transportation only to the extent that other Federal agencies provide
funding to the Department in accordance
with the preceding proviso: Provided further,
That of the amounts made available under
this heading, $9,647,000 shall be for the purposes, and in the amounts, specified for Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending in the table entitled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included for this division
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act): Provided further,
That amounts made available in the preceding proviso for such purposes shall not diminish or prejudice any application or geographic region for other discretionary grant
or loan awards made by the Department of
Transportation: Provided further, That of the
amounts made available under this heading,
$2,000,000 shall be made available for an independent review of airspace design, civil-military coordination, and operational safety in
the National Capital Region, with particular
focus on airspace activities at Ronald
Reagan Washington National Airport, as
specified under the paragraph entitled
‘‘Flight 5342’’ in Senate Report 119–47.
WORKING CAPITAL FUND
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

For necessary expenses for operating costs
and capital outlays of the Working Capital
Fund as authorized in section 327 of title 49,
United
States
Code,
not
to
exceed
$764,965,000, shall be paid from appropriations
made available to the Department of Transportation: Provided, That such services shall
be provided on a competitive basis to entities within the Department of Transportation: Provided further, That the limitation
under this heading on operating expenses
shall not apply to entities external to the
Department of Transportation or for funds
provided in Public Law 117–58: Provided further, That no funds made available by this
Act to an agency of the Department shall be
transferred to the Working Capital Fund
without majority approval of the Working
Capital Fund Steering Committee and approval of the Secretary: Provided further,
That no assessments may be levied against
any program, budget activity, subactivity,
or project funded by this Act unless notice of
such assessments and the basis therefor are
presented to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations and are approved by
such Committees: Provided further, That the
Secretary may provide non-commodity information technology and procurement services in a consolidated or shared manner for
operating administrations through the
Working Capital Fund: Provided further, That
the preceding proviso shall not apply to the
Federal Aviation Administration, the Great
Lakes St. Lawrence Seaway Development
Corporation, and the Office of Inspector General: Provided further, That an operating administration may determine that certain
non-commodity information technology and
procurement services do not provide a direct

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

benefit to the operating administration and
shall not be required to obligate funds appropriated by this Act to the Office of the Secretary pursuant to section 188 of this Act:
Provided further, That if the determination in
the preceding proviso concludes that noncommodity information technology and procurement services do not provide a direct
benefit to the operating administration,
those services shall remain within the operating administration: Provided further, That
not less than 30 days prior to using the authority provided in the preceding four provisos, the Secretary shall provide the House
and Senate Committees on Appropriations a
plan describing the non-commodity information technology and procurement services
consolidated or shared through the Working
Capital Fund: Provided further, That the Secretary shall provide monthly briefings to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations on all activities relating to non-commodity information technology and procurement services as authorized under this heading, including: (1) the amount of funding participating operating administrations provide
the Working Capital Fund for programming
and full time equivalent positions, including
reimbursable and non-reimbursable details,
to support non-commodity information technology and procurement services as authorized under this heading; and (2) the number
of full time equivalent positions in the Office
of the Chief Information Officer within the
Office of the Secretary and the Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Administration
within the Office of the Secretary to support
non-commodity information technology and
procurement services as authorized under
this heading: Provided further, That the Secretary shall include funding for programming and full time equivalent positions to
support non-commodity information technology and procurement services, as authorized under this heading, in the congressional
budget justification for fiscal year 2027 for
the Working Capital Fund, the Office of the
Chief Information Officer within the Office
of the Secretary, the Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Administration within the Office of the Secretary, and each participating
operating administration: Provided further,
That unless otherwise specified under this
heading, the Working Capital Fund shall
only deliver services consisting of administration and commodity information technology: Provided further, That the departmental consolidation of activities including
human resources, governmental affairs, public affairs and public engagement, and civil
rights in the Working Capital Fund are prohibited: Provided further, That amounts within the Working Capital Fund are not available to provide services not specifically authorized under this heading.
SMALL AND DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS
UTILIZATION AND OUTREACH

For necessary expenses for small and disadvantaged business utilization and outreach
activities, $5,330,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2027: Provided, That not
less than 6 small business transportation resource centers shall be maintained and operated: Provided further, That notwithstanding
section 332 of title 49, United States Code,
such amounts may be used for business opportunities related to any mode of transportation: Provided further, That appropriations
made available under this heading shall be
available for any purpose consistent with
prior year appropriations that were made
available under the heading ‘‘Office of the
Secretary—Minority Business Resource Center Program’’.
PAYMENTS TO AIR CARRIERS
(AIRPORT AND AIRWAY TRUST FUND)

In addition to funds made available from
any other source to carry out the essential

PO 00000

Frm 00062

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

air service program under sections 41731
through 41742 of title 49, United States Code,
$513,637,231, to be derived from the Airport
and Airway Trust Fund, to remain available
until expended: Provided, That in determining between or among carriers competing to provide service to a community,
the Secretary may consider the relative subsidy requirements of the carriers: Provided
further, That basic essential air service minimum requirements shall not include the 15passenger capacity requirement under section 41732(b)(3) of title 49, United States
Code: Provided further, That amounts authorized to be distributed for the essential air
service program under section 41742(b) of
title 49, United States Code, shall be made
available immediately from amounts otherwise provided to the Administrator of the
Federal Aviation Administration: Provided
further, That the Administrator may reimburse such amounts from fees credited to the
account established under section 45303 of
title 49, United States Code: Provided further,
That, notwithstanding section 41733 of title
49, United States Code, for fiscal year 2026,
the requirements established under subparagraphs (B) and (C) of section 41731(a)(1) of
title 49, United States Code, shall not apply
to maintain eligibility under section 41731 of
title 49, United States Code.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—OFFICE OF THE
SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION
(INCLUDING RESCISSIONS)
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 101. None of the funds made available
by this Act to the Department of Transportation may be obligated for the Office of the
Secretary of Transportation to approve assessments or reimbursable agreements pertaining to funds appropriated to the operating administrations in this Act, except for
activities underway on the date of enactment of this Act, unless such assessments or
agreements have completed the normal reprogramming process for congressional notification.
SEC. 102. The Secretary shall post on the
website of the Department of Transportation
a schedule of all meetings of the Council on
Credit and Finance, including the agenda for
each meeting, and require the Council on
Credit and Finance to record the decisions
and actions of each meeting.
SEC. 103. In addition to authority provided
by section 327 of title 49, United States Code,
the Department’s Working Capital Fund is
authorized to provide partial or full payments in advance and accept subsequent reimbursements from all Federal agencies
from available funds for transit benefit distribution services that are necessary to
carry out the Federal transit pass transportation fringe benefit program under Executive Order No. 13150 and section 3049 of
SAFETEA–LU (5 U.S.C. 7905 note): Provided,
That the Department shall maintain a reasonable operating reserve in the Working
Capital Fund, to be expended in advance to
provide uninterrupted transit benefits to
Government employees: Provided further,
That such reserve shall not exceed 1 month
of benefits payable and may be used only for
the purpose of providing for the continuation
of transit benefits: Provided further, That the
Working Capital Fund shall be fully reimbursed by each customer agency from available funds for the actual cost of the transit
benefit.
SEC. 104. Receipts collected in the Department’s Working Capital Fund, as authorized
by section 327 of title 49, United States Code,
for unused transit and van pool benefits, in
an amount not to exceed 10 percent of fiscal
year 2026 collections, shall be available until
expended in the Department’s Working Capital Fund to provide contractual services in

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

support of section 189 of this Act: Provided,
That obligations in fiscal year 2026 of such
collections shall not exceed $1,000,000.
SEC. 105. None of the funds in this title
may be obligated or expended for retention
or senior executive bonuses for an employee
of the Department of Transportation without the prior written approval of the Assistant Secretary for Administration.
SEC. 106. In addition to authority provided
by section 327 of title 49, United States Code,
the Department’s Administrative Working
Capital Fund is hereby authorized to transfer information technology equipment, software, and systems from departmental
sources or other entities and collect and
maintain a reserve at rates which will return
full cost of transferred assets.
SEC. 107. None of the funds provided in this
Act to the Department of Transportation
may be used to provide credit assistance unless not less than 3 days before any application approval to provide credit assistance
under sections 603 and 604 of title 23, United
States Code, the Secretary provides notification in writing to the following committees:
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations; the Committee on Environment
and Public Works and the Committee on
Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs of the
Senate; and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of
Representatives: Provided, That such notification shall include, but not be limited to,
the name of the project sponsor; a description of the project; whether credit assistance
will be provided as a direct loan, loan guarantee, or line of credit; and the amount of
credit assistance.
SEC. 108. (a) Amounts made available to
the Secretary of Transportation or the Department of Transportation’s operating administrations in this Act for the costs of
award, administration, or oversight of financial assistance under the programs identified
in subsection (c) may be transferred to the
account identified in section 801 of division J
of Public Law 117–58, as amended by section
425 of title IV of division L of Public Law
117–103, to remain available until expended,
for the necessary expenses of award, administration, or oversight of any financial assistance programs in the Department of
Transportation.
(b) Amounts transferred under the authority in this section are available in addition
to amounts otherwise available for such purpose.
(c) The programs from which funds made
available under this Act may be transferred
under subsection (a) are—
(1) the local and regional project assistance program under section 6702 of title 49,
United States Code;
(2) the university transportation centers
program under section 5505 of title 49, United
States Code; and
(3) the drone infrastructure inspection
grant program as authorized by section 912
of title IX of Public Law 118–63.
SEC. 109. The Secretary of Transportation
may transfer amounts awarded to a federally
recognized Tribe under a funding agreement
entered into under part 29 of title 49, Code of
Federal Regulations, from the Department of
Transportation’s operating administrations
to the Office of Tribal Government Affairs:
Provided, That any amounts retroceded or reassumed under such part may be transferred
back to the appropriate operating administration.
SEC. 109A. For amounts provided for this
fiscal year and prior fiscal years, section
24112(c)(2)(B) of Public Law 117–58 shall be
applied by substituting ‘‘30 percent’’ for ‘‘40
percent’’: Provided, That if the Secretary determines that there are insufficient meritworthy applications for the amounts pro-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1237

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

vided for fiscal year 2022 through fiscal year
2026 in division J of Public Law 117–58 for
competitive grants as authorized in section
24112 of division B of Public Law 117–58 to
meet
the
requirement
in
section
24112(c)(2)(B) for a fiscal year, the Secretary
shall use the unutilized amounts to make
other grants as authorized in section 24112 of
division B of Public Law 117–58: Provided further, That amounts repurposed pursuant to
this section shall continue to be treated as
amounts specified in section 103(b) of division A of Public Law 118–5.
SEC. 109B. The remaining unobligated balances, as of September 30, 2026, from
amounts made available for ‘‘Department of
Transportation—Office of the Secretary—National Infrastructure Investments’’ in division J of Public Law 117–58 for local and regional project assistance under section 6702
of title 49, United States Code, for fiscal year
2022 are hereby permanently rescinded, and
an amount of additional new budget authority equivalent to the amount rescinded pursuant to this section is hereby appropriated
on September 30, 2026, for an additional
amount for fiscal year 2026, to remain available until September 30, 2031, and shall be
available, without additional competition,
for completing the funding of awards made
pursuant to section 6702 of title 49, United
States Code, for fiscal year 2022 funding, in
addition to other funds as may be available
for such purposes: Provided, That the
amounts rescinded pursuant to this section
that were previously designated by the Congress as an emergency requirement pursuant
to section 4112(a) of H. Con. Res. 71 (115th
Congress), the concurrent resolution on the
budget for fiscal year 2018, and to section
251(b) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency
Deficit Control Act of 1985 are designated by
the Congress as an emergency requirement
pursuant to 4001(a)(1) of S. Con. Res 14 (117th
Congress), the concurrent resolution on the
budget for fiscal year 2022, and to legislation
establishing fiscal year 2026 budget enforcement in the House of Representatives: Provided further, That the amount of additional
new budget authority is designated by the
Congress as being for an emergency requirement pursuant to such section 4001(a) and to
legislation establishing fiscal year 2026 budget enforcement in the House of Representatives.
SEC. 109C. None of the funds made available by this or any other Act shall be used to
cancel or seek to renegotiate an existing
contract under the essential air service program under subchapter II of chapter 417 of
title 49, United States Code, before the
standard period of rebidding occurring prior
to a contract’s expiration unless in response
to an explicit written request from the EAS
Community: Provided, That this section shall
only apply to existing contracts under which
the carrier is in compliance with the contract terms.
SEC. 109D. Of the unobligated balances of
funds remaining from—
(1) ‘‘Transportation Planning, Research,
and Development’’ account in title I of division A of Public Law 111–117, $108,147.49 is
hereby permanently rescinded; and
(2) ‘‘Transportation Planning, Research,
and Development’’ account in title I of division F of Public Law 108–199, $744,000 is hereby permanently rescinded.
SEC. 109E. Of the unobligated balances
from amounts made available for ‘‘Railroad
Rehabilitation and Improvement Financing
Program’’ in section 420 of title IV of division G of Public Law 116–6, $25,476 is hereby
permanently rescinded.
SEC. 109F. Of the unobligated balances
from amounts made available for ‘‘Department of Transportation—Office of the Secretary—Salaries and Expenses’’ in Public

PO 00000

Frm 00063

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Law 119–4, $10,368,826 is hereby permanently
rescinded.
SEC. 109G. Of the unobligated balances
from amounts made available until expended
for ‘‘Department of Transportation—Office
of the Secretary—Research and Technology’’
in division L of title I of Public Law 117–103,
$1,272,800.79 is hereby permanently rescinded.
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
OPERATIONS
(AIRPORT AND AIRWAY TRUST FUND)

For necessary expenses of the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA), not otherwise provided for, including operations and
research activities related to commercial
space transportation, administrative expenses for research and development, establishment of air navigation facilities, the operation (including leasing) and maintenance
of aircraft, subsidizing the cost of aeronautical charts and maps sold to the public,
the lease or purchase of passenger motor vehicles for replacement only, $13,710,000,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2027, of
which $13,040,600,000 to be derived from the
Airport and Airway Trust Fund: Provided,
That of the amounts made available under
this heading—
(1) not less than $1,842,037,000 shall be
available for aviation safety activities;
(2) $10,340,667,000 shall be available for air
traffic organization activities;
(3) $41,755,000 shall be available for commercial space transportation activities;
(4) $963,410,000 shall be available for finance
and management activities;
(5) $65,813,000 shall be available for
NextGen and operations planning activities;
(6) $154,896,000 shall be available for security and hazardous materials safety activities; and
(7) $301,422,000 shall be available for staff
offices:
Provided further, That of the amounts allocated under the previous proviso—
(A) not less than $379,223,000 shall be for
aircraft certification service;
(B) not less than $100,000,000 shall be for
the Office of Aerospace Medicine;
(C) not less than $279,200,000 shall be used
to fund direct operations of the current air
traffic control towers in the contract tower
program, including the contract tower cost
share program, and any airport that is currently qualified or that will qualify for the
program during the fiscal year;
(D) $6,000,000 shall be for the pilot program
to convert high activity air traffic control
towers operating under the contract tower
program to FAA staffed visual flight rules
towers, as authorized under section 625 of the
FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024, and to
prioritize the contract towers as required
under section 625(a)(2) of such Act;
(E) not less than $16,000,000 shall be for the
Office of Spectrum Engineering;
(F) $6,000,000 shall be for unmanned aircraft system test ranges;
(G) not less than $7,500,000 shall be for the
internship program authorized under section
404 of the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024
(Public Law 118–63);
(H) not less than $1,000,000 shall be for the
human intervention motivation study contract and the flight attendant drug and alcohol program contract; and
(I) $3,000,000 shall be for the FAA’s veterans’ pilot training program:
Provided further, That not to exceed 5 percent
of any budget activity, except for aviation
safety budget activity, may be transferred to
any budget activity under this heading: Provided further, That no transfer may increase
or decrease any appropriation under this
heading by more than 5 percent: Provided further, That any transfer in excess of 5 percent
shall be treated as a reprogramming of funds

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1238

under section 405 of this Act and shall not be
available for obligation or expenditure except in compliance with the procedures set
forth in that section: Provided further, That
not later than 45 days after the submission of
the budget request, the Administrator of the
Federal Aviation Administration shall transmit to Congress an annual update to the report submitted to Congress in December 2004
pursuant to section 221 of the Vision 100-Century of Aviation Reauthorization Act (49
U.S.C. 44506 note): Provided further, That not
later than 45 days after the submission of the
budget request, the Administrator shall
transmit to Congress reports that describe a
comprehensive strategy for staffing, hiring,
and training of flight standards and aircraft
certification staff, and airway transportation system specialists in a format similar
to the one utilized for the controller staffing
plan, including stated attrition estimates
and numerical hiring goals by fiscal year:
Provided further, That the amounts made
available under this heading shall be reduced
by $100,000 for each day after 45 days after
the submission of the budget request that reports containing the information described
in the preceding two provisos have not been
transmitted to Congress: Provided further,
That funds may be used to enter into a grant
agreement with a nonprofit standard-setting
organization to assist in the development of
aviation safety standards: Provided further,
That none of the funds made available by
this Act shall be available for new applicants
for the second career training program: Provided further, That none of the funds made
available by this Act shall be available for
the Federal Aviation Administration to finalize or implement any regulation that
would promulgate new aviation user fees not
specifically authorized by law after the date
of the enactment of this Act: Provided further, That there may be credited to this appropriation, as offsetting collections, funds
received from States, counties, municipalities, foreign authorities, other public authorities, and private sources for expenses
incurred in the provision of agency services,
including receipts for the maintenance and
operation of air navigation facilities, and for
issuance, renewal or modification of certificates, including airman, aircraft, and repair
station certificates, or for tests related
thereto, or for processing major repair or alteration forms: Provided further, That not
later than 120 days after enactment of this
Act, the Administrator shall transmit to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations a report on all expenditures related to
the contract tower program from the most
recent fiscal year, including a breakout for
administrative costs, contract support expenses, insurance, equipment procured and
installed in contract towers, new starts, and
aggregate payments for operating the contract towers: Provided further, That not later
than 180 days after enactment of this Act,
the Administrator shall transmit to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations a report on the FAA’s ongoing efforts
and future plans to equip contract towers
with radar displays and other technology
that the FAA believes are necessary to enhance aviation safety: Provided further, That
none of the funds made available by this Act
for aeronautical charting and cartography
are available for activities conducted by, or
coordinated through, the Working Capital
Fund: Provided further, That not less than
$4,000,000 of amounts made available for staff
offices shall be used to establish the Office of
the Assistant Administrator for Rulemaking
and Regulatory Improvement as authorized
under section 106(c) of title 49, United States
Code: Provided further, That none of the
funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this Act or any other Act may be

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

used to eliminate the contract weather observers program at any airport.
FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT

or decrease any funding level in such tables
by more than 7 percent.
RESEARCH, ENGINEERING, AND DEVELOPMENT

(AIRPORT AND AIRWAY TRUST FUND)

(AIRPORT AND AIRWAY TRUST FUND)

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided for, for acquisition, establishment,
technical support services, improvement by
contract or purchase, and hire of national
airspace systems and experimental facilities
and equipment, as authorized under part A of
subtitle VII of title 49, United States Code,
including initial acquisition of necessary
sites by lease or grant; engineering and service testing, including construction of test facilities and acquisition of necessary sites by
lease or grant; construction and furnishing
of quarters and related accommodations for
officers and employees of the Federal Aviation Administration stationed at remote localities where such accommodations are not
available; and the purchase, lease, or transfer of aircraft from funds made available
under this heading, including aircraft for
aviation regulation and certification; to be
derived from the Airport and Airway Trust
Fund, $4,000,000,000, of which $697,850,000 is
for personnel and related expenses and shall
remain available until September 30, 2027,
and $3,302,150,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2028: Provided, That the sums
appropriated under this heading in this Act
shall be made available for the purposes, and
in the amounts, specified for spending in the
table entitled ‘‘Allocation of FAA Facilities
and Equipment Funding in This Act—Fiscal
Year 2026’’ included for this division in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act): Provided further, That the
sums appropriated under this heading in
title VIII of division J of the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58)
shall be made available for the purposes, and
in the amounts, specified for spending in the
table entitled ‘‘Allocation of FAA Facilities
and Equipment Funding in the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act—Fiscal Year
2026’’ included for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in
the matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act): Provided further, That
amounts repurposed pursuant to the preceding proviso shall continue to be treated
as amounts specified in section 103(b) of division A of Public Law 118–5: Provided further,
That there may be credited to this appropriation funds received from States, counties, municipalities, other public authorities,
and private sources, for expenses incurred in
the establishment, improvement, and modernization of national airspace systems: Provided further, That not later than 30 days
after submission of the budget request, the
Secretary of Transportation shall transmit
to the Congress an investment plan for the
Federal Aviation Administration which includes funding for each budget line item for
fiscal years 2027 through 2031, with total
funding for each year of the plan constrained
to the funding targets for those years as estimated and approved by the Office of Management and Budget: Provided further, That section 405 of this Act shall apply to amounts
made available under the heading in this Act
and in title VIII of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (division J of Public Law
117–58): Provided further, That, notwithstanding subsections (a)(5) and (a)(6) of such
section 405, unless prior approval is received
from the House and Senate Committees on
Appropriations, not to exceed 7 percent of
any funding level specified for projects and
activities in the tables incorporated by reference under this heading may be transferred
to any other funding level specified for
projects and activities in such tables and no
transfer of such funding levels may increase

For necessary expenses, not otherwise provided for, for research, engineering, and development, as authorized under part A of
subtitle VII of title 49, United States Code,
including construction of experimental facilities and acquisition of necessary sites by
lease or grant, $290,000,000, to be derived from
the Airport and Airway Trust Fund and to
remain available until September 30, 2028:
Provided, That there may be credited to this
appropriation as offsetting collections, funds
received from States, counties, municipalities, other public authorities, and private
sources, which shall be available for expenses incurred for research, engineering,
and development: Provided further, That the
sums appropriated under this heading shall
be made available for the purposes, and in
the amounts, specified in the table entitled
‘‘Research, Engineering, and Development’’
included for this division in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided further, That not to exceed 7
percent of any funding level specified in the
table incorporated by reference under this
heading included for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act)may be transferred to any
other funding level specified under this heading included for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the
matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act): Provided further, That no transfer
may increase or decrease any funding level
by more than 7 percent: Provided further,
That any transfer in excess of 7 percent shall
be treated as a reprogramming of funds
under section 405 of this Act and shall not be
available for obligation or expenditure except in compliance with the procedures set
forth in that section: Provided further, That
of the amounts made available under this
heading, $40,000,000, to remain available until
expended, shall be for aviation workforce development programs, as authorized under
section 625 of the FAA Reauthorization Act
of 2018, as amended (49 U.S.C. 40132 note):
Provided further, That of the amounts set
aside under the preceding proviso—
(1) no less than $10,000,000 shall be awarded
for manufacturing workforce grants as authorized under section 625 (a)(3) of such Act;
(2) $10,000,000 shall be for not more than
two community colleges that are sponsors of
a general aviation airport identified in the
National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems: Provided, That grants awarded under
this paragraph for community colleges shall
be awarded for an amount not less than
$5,000,000 per award: Provided further, That
the Secretary may award such grants under
this subsection notwithstanding section
625(b)(2) of the FAA Reauthorization Act of
2018, as amended (49 U.S.C. 40132 note); and
(3) no less than $20,000,000 shall be awarded
to institutions eligible under paragraphs (1)
and (3) of section 1067q(a) of title 20, United
States Code, and priority shall be given to
institutions or consortiums of institutions
near commercial aviation manufacturing
and military aviation employment opportunities.
GRANTS-IN-AID FOR AIRPORTS

PO 00000

Frm 00064

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(AIRPORT AND AIRWAY TRUST FUND)
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For liquidation of obligations incurred for
grants-in-aid for airport planning and development, and noise compatibility planning

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

and programs as authorized under subchapter I of chapter 471 and subchapter I of
chapter 475 of title 49, United States Code,
and under other law authorizing such obligations; for procurement, installation, and
commissioning of runway incursion prevention devices and systems at airports of such
title; for grants authorized under section
41743 of title 49, United States Code; and for
inspection activities and administration of
airport safety programs, including those related to airport operating certificates under
section 44706 of title 49, United States Code,
$4,000,000,000, to be derived from the Airport
and Airway Trust Fund and to remain available until expended: Provided, That none of
the amounts made available under this heading shall be available for the planning or
execution of programs the obligations for
which are in excess of $4,000,000,000, in fiscal
year 2026, notwithstanding section 47117(g) of
title 49, United States Code: Provided further,
That none of the amounts made available
under this heading shall be available for the
replacement of baggage conveyor systems,
reconfiguration of terminal baggage areas,
or other airport improvements that are necessary to install bulk explosive detection
systems: Provided further, That notwithstanding section 47109(a) of title 49, United
States Code, the Government’s share of allowable project costs under paragraph (2) of
such section for subgrants or paragraph (3) of
such section shall be 95 percent for a project
at other than a large or medium hub airport
that is a successive phase of a multi-phased
construction project for which the project
sponsor received a grant in fiscal year 2011
for the construction project: Provided further,
That notwithstanding any other provision of
law, of amounts limited under this heading,
not less than $160,000,000 shall be available
for administration, $15,000,000 shall be available for the airport cooperative research program, $41,827,000 shall be available for the
airport technology research program and of
which, $6,000,000 shall be available for the
airfield technology program authorized
under section 1014 of Public Law 118–63, of
which $3,000,000 is for concrete pavement research and $3,000,000 is for asphalt pavement
research, and $15,000,000, to remain available
until expended, shall be available and transferred to ‘‘Office of the Secretary, Salaries
and Expenses’’ to carry out the small community air service development program:
Provided further, That in addition to airports
eligible under section 41743 of title 49, United
States Code, such program may include the
participation of an airport that serves a
community or consortium that is not larger
than a small hub airport, according to Federal Aviation Administration hub classifications effective at the time the Office of the
Secretary issues a request for proposals.
GRANTS-IN-AID FOR AIRPORTS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For an additional amount for ‘‘Grants-InAid for Airports’’, to enable the Secretary of
Transportation to make grants for projects
as authorized by subchapter 1 of chapter 471
of title 49, United States Code, subchapter 1
of chapter 475 of such title, and section 767 of
the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 (Public
Law 118–63), $577,356,000, to remain available
through September 30, 2028: Provided, That
amounts made available under this heading
shall be derived from the general fund, and
such funds shall not be subject to apportionment formulas, special apportionment categories, or minimum percentages under
chapter 471 of title 49, United States Code:
Provided further, That the amounts made
available under this heading shall not be
subject to any limitation on obligations for
the Grants-in-Aid for Airports program set
forth in any Act: Provided further, That of
the sums appropriated under this heading—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1239

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(1) $542,356,000 shall be made available for
the purposes, and in the amounts, specified
for Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending in the table entitled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ for this division
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act): Provided, That
amounts made available in the preceding
proviso for such purposes shall not diminish
or prejudice any application or geographic
region for other discretionary grant or loan
awards made by the Department of Transportation: Provided further, That funds made
available under this section shall not be subject to or considered under section
47115(j)(3)(B), 47115(j)(3)(C), or 47115(j)(3)(D) of
title 49, United States Code; and
(2) up to $35,000,000 shall be made available
to the Secretary to distribute as discretionary grants to airports that include, but
are not limited to, projects that are eligible
under section 47115(j)(3)(D) of title 49, United
States Code: Provided, That of amounts made
available under this heading, $20,000,000 shall
be made available for the Secretary to distribute as discretionary grants for airports
with scheduled commercial service in calendar year 2024, that serve essential air service markets as reported in October 2024, reported and certified zero dollars total debt at
end of year on the form FAA–5100–127 submitted before the date of enactment of this
Act for fiscal year 2024, and were allocated
an amount under the heading ‘‘Grants-in-Aid
for Airports’’ in division B of Public Law 116–
136 equal to or less than the amount designated for a regional airport under paragraph (4) under such heading: Provided further, That the funds made available under
the preceding proviso shall be prioritized for
airports participating in the FAA Contract
Tower Program:
Provided further, That of the amounts made
available under this heading—
(1) $300,000,000 shall be derived by transfer
from the unobligated balances of amounts
previously appropriated for fiscal years 2023,
2024, 2025, and 2026 for personnel, contracting,
and other costs to administer and oversee
grants (excluding amounts transferred to the
Office of Inspector General of the Department of Transportation) under the heading
‘‘Federal Aviation Administration—Airport
Infrastructure Grants’’ in title VIII of division J of the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58); and
(2) $68,670,000 shall be derived by transfer
from the unobligated balances of amounts
previously appropriated for fiscal years 2023,
2024, 2025, and 2026 for personnel, contracting,
and other costs to administer and oversee
grants (excluding amounts transferred to the
Office of Inspector General of the Department of Transportation) under the heading
‘‘Federal Aviation Administration—Airport
Terminal Program’’ in title VIII of division J
of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act (Public Law 117–58):
Provided further, That amounts transferred
pursuant to the preceding provisos shall continue to be treated as amounts specified in
section 103(b) of division A of Public Law
118–5.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—FEDERAL
AVIATION ADMINISTRATION

SEC. 110. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to compensate in excess of 600 technical staff-years under the
federally funded research and development
center contract between the Federal Aviation Administration and the Center for Advanced Aviation Systems Development during fiscal year 2026.
SEC. 111. None of the funds made available
by this Act shall be used to pursue or adopt

PO 00000

Frm 00065

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

guidelines or regulations requiring airport
sponsors to provide to the Federal Aviation
Administration without cost building construction, maintenance, utilities and expenses, including related accommodation
services, or space in airport sponsor-owned
buildings for services relating to air traffic
control, air navigation, or weather reporting: Provided, That the prohibition on the
use of funds in this section does not apply to
negotiations between the agency and airport
sponsors to achieve agreement on ‘‘belowmarket’’ rates for these items or to grant assurances that require airport sponsors to
provide land without cost to the Federal
Aviation Administration for air traffic control facilities.
SEC. 112. The Administrator of the Federal
Aviation Administration may reimburse
amounts made available to satisfy section
41742(a)(1) of title 49, United States Code,
from fees credited under section 45303 of title
49, United States Code, and any amount remaining in such account at the close of any
fiscal year may be made available to satisfy
section 41742(a)(1) of title 49, United States
Code, for the subsequent fiscal year.
SEC. 113. Amounts collected under section
40113(e) of title 49, United States Code, shall
be credited to the appropriation current at
the time of collection, to be merged with and
available for the same purposes as such appropriation.
SEC. 114. None of the funds made available
by this Act shall be available for paying premium pay under section 5546(a) of title 5,
United States Code, to any Federal Aviation
Administration employee unless such employee actually performed work during the
time corresponding to such premium pay.
SEC. 115. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be obligated or expended for
an employee of the Federal Aviation Administration to purchase a store gift card or gift
certificate through use of a Governmentissued credit card.
SEC. 116. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, none of the funds made available
under this Act or any prior Act may be used
to implement or to continue to implement
any limitation on the ability of any owner or
operator of a private aircraft to obtain, upon
a request to the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, a blocking of
that owner’s or operator’s aircraft registration number, Mode S transponder code,
flight identification, call sign, or similar
identifying information from any ground
based display to the public that would allow
the real-time or near real-time flight tracking of that aircraft’s movements, except data
made available to a Government agency, for
the noncommercial flights of that owner or
operator.
SEC. 117. None of the funds made available
by this Act shall be available for salaries and
expenses of more than nine political and
Presidential appointees in the Federal Aviation Administration: Provided, That of the
nine political and Presidential appointee positions in the Federal Aviation Administration, not less than one position shall be
within each of the following offices and no
appointee shall be in any other office: the Office of the Administrator, the Office of the
Deputy Administrator, the Office of the General Counsel, the Office of Government and
Industry Affairs, the Office of Communications, the Office of Airports, and the Office
for Policy, International Affairs, and Environment.
SEC. 118. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to increase fees pursuant to section 44721 of title 49, United
States Code, until the Federal Aviation Administration provides to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations a report
that justifies all fees related to aeronautical

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1240

navigation products and explains how such
fees are consistent with Executive Order No.
13642.
SEC. 119. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to close a regional
operations center of the Federal Aviation
Administration or reduce its services or personnel unless the Administrator notifies the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations not less than 90 full business days in
advance.
SEC. 119A. None of the funds made available by or limited by this Act may be used to
change weight restrictions or prior permission rules at Teterboro airport in Teterboro,
New Jersey.
SEC. 119B. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used by the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration to withhold from consideration and approval any new application for participation
in the contract tower program, or for reevaluation of cost-share program participants so long as the Federal Aviation Administration has received an application
from the airport, and so long as the Administrator determines such tower is eligible
using the factors set forth in Federal Aviation Administration published establishment
criteria.
SEC. 119C. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to open, close,
redesignate as a lesser office, or reorganize a
regional office, the aeronautical center, or
the technical center unless the Administrator does so in compliance with section 405
of this Act.
SEC. 119D. Notwithstanding subsection
(a)(7) of section 405, activities creating, reorganizing, or restructuring an organizational
unit of the Federal Aviation Administration
are not subject to the requirements of section 405 unless those activities would change
the organization chart provided as an exhibit
to section 1 of the President’s Budget justification.
SEC. 119E. For an additional amount for
‘‘Grants-in-aid for Airports’’, up to $3,500,000
shall be available through September 30,
2028, for necessary expenses, including an
independent verification regime, to provide
reimbursement to airport sponsors that do
not provide gateway operations and providers of general aviation ground support
services, or other aviation tenants, located
at those airports closed during a temporary
flight restriction (TFR) for any residence of
the President that is designated or identified
to be secured by the United States Secret
Service, and for direct and incremental financial losses incurred while such airports
are closed solely due to the actions of the
Federal Government: Provided, That such
amounts shall be derived from balances remaining from amounts appropriated for such
purposes in prior Acts: Provided further, That
such amounts shall not be subject to any
limitation on obligations for the Grants-inAid for Airports program set forth in any
Act: Provided further, That no funds shall be
obligated or distributed to airport sponsors
that do not provide gateway operations and
providers of general aviation ground support
services until an independent audit is completed: Provided further, That losses incurred
as a result of violations of law, or through
fault or negligence, of such operators and
service providers or of third parties (including airports) are not eligible for reimbursements: Provided further, That obligation and
expenditure of funds are conditional upon
full release of the United States Government
for all claims for financial losses resulting
from such actions.
SEC. 119F. Section 44502(e) of title 49,
United States Code, shall be applied by inserting the following after paragraph (4):
‘‘(5) LIMITATIONS.—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

‘‘(A) SYSTEMS OR EQUIPMENT.—Eligible air
traffic systems or equipment identified in
subparagraphs (A) through (C) of paragraph
(3) of this subsection to be transferred to the
Administrator under this subsection must
have been purchased by the transferor airport on or after October 5, 2018.
‘‘(B) OTHER SYSTEMS OR EQUIPMENT.—Eligible air traffic systems or equipment identified in subparagraph (D) of paragraph (3) of
this subsection to be transferred to the Administrator under this subsection must have
been purchased by the transferor airport on
or after October 1, 2024.
‘‘(6) AIRPORTS CLASSIFIED AS A BASIC OR
LOCAL GENERAL AVIATION AIRPORT.—An airport that is categorized as a basic or local
general aviation airport under the most recently published national plan of integrated
airport systems under section 47103 may only
transfer an eligible air traffic system or
equipment under this subsection in accordance with the exception provided in paragraph (4) if such system or equipment was
purchased by the transferor airport on or
after October 1, 2024.’’.
SEC. 119G. None of the funds in this or any
other Act shall be used to plan, design, or
implement the privatization or separation of
the air traffic organization functions of the
Federal Aviation Administration.
SEC. 119H. None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available by this or any
other Act may be used for the construction
of a new Air Traffic Control Training Academy except for the Federal Aviation Administration’s existing Training Academy located at the Mike Monroney Aeronautical
Center.
SEC. 119I. Notwithstanding section 40122(c)
of title 49, United States Code, for this year
and thereafter, the Administrator of the
Federal Aviation Administration, in consultation with the Federal Air Surgeon, may
increase the annual rate of basic pay for positions in the Office of Aerospace Medicine
requiring a medical degree up to the annual
compensation paid under section 102 of title
3, United States Code.
SEC. 119J. The Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration is directed to
provide a spend plan and a briefing within 30
days of enactment of this Act, and each
month thereafter during fiscal year 2026, to
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations on all activities and efforts funded
by this Act and section 40003 of Public Law
119–21 for the Federal Aviation Administration’s air traffic control modernization efforts: Provided, That the Administrator shall
make available for each briefing the Federal
Aviation Administration’s Chief Financial
Officer and the Assistant Administrator for
Policy, International Affairs, and Environment, and the Federal Aviation Administration’s Air Traffic Organization’s Chief Operating Officer and Chief Technology Officer.
FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
LIMITATION ON ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

Not to exceed $504,187,977 together with advances and reimbursements received by the
Federal Highway Administration, shall be
obligated for necessary expenses for administration and operation of the Federal Highway Administration: Provided, That in addition, $3,248,000 shall be transferred to the Appalachian Regional Commission in accordance with section 104(a) of title 23, United
States Code.
FEDERAL-AID HIGHWAYS
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

Funds available for the implementation or
execution of authorized Federal-aid highway

PO 00000

Frm 00066

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

and highway safety construction programs
shall not exceed total obligations of
$62,657,105,821 for fiscal year 2026: Provided,
That the limitation on obligations under
this heading shall only apply to contract authority authorized from the Highway Trust
Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account),
unless otherwise specified in law.
(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)
(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

For the payment of obligations incurred in
carrying out authorized Federal-aid highway
and highway safety construction programs,
$63,396,105,821 shall be derived from the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account), to remain available until expended.
HIGHWAY INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAMS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For the purposes as described under this
heading, $2,395,880,591, of which $927,212,591
shall be appropriated from the general fund,
and of which—
(1) $1,093,756,000 shall be derived from the
unobligated balances of amounts previously
appropriated under the heading ‘‘Federal
Highway Administration—Highway Infrastructure Programs’’ in title VIII of division
J of Public Law 117–58, as follows:
(A) $125,000,000 from amounts previously
appropriated for fiscal years 2023, 2024, 2025,
and 2026 for operations and administration of
the Federal Highway Administration (excluding amounts transferred to the Office of
Inspector General of the Department of
Transportation);
(B) $75,000,000 from amounts previously appropriated for fiscal year 2022 in paragraph
(2) of such title VIII for the Joint Office of
Energy and Transportation;
(C) $300,000,000 from amounts previously
appropriated for fiscal years 2024, 2025, and
2026 in paragraph (2) of such title VIII for
grants to States or localities that require additional assistance to strategically deploy
electric vehicle charging infrastructure;
(D) $503,756,000 from amounts previously
appropriated for fiscal years 2022, 2023, 2024,
2025, and 2026 in paragraph (2) of such title
VIII that were distributed among the States,
to be derived on a proportional basis from
such unobligated amounts based on the unobligated balances from fiscal year 2022 by
State as of January 31, 2026; and
(E) $90,000,000 from amounts previously appropriated for fiscal years 2024, 2025, and 2026
under paragraph (5) of such title VIII for the
reduction of truck emissions at port facilities program:
Provided, That amounts derived from the unobligated balances as described in the matter
preceding this proviso shall continue to be
treated as amounts specified in section 103(b)
of division A of Public Law 118–5;
(2) $20,000,000 shall be derived by transfer
from the unobligated balances of amounts
previously appropriated for fiscal years 2025
and 2026 under the heading ‘‘Federal Motor
Carrier Safety Administration—Motor Carrier Safety Operations and Program’’ in title
VIII of division J of Public Law 117–58: Provided, That amounts derived by transfer as
described in the matter preceding this proviso shall continue to be treated as amounts
specified in section 103(b) of division A of
Public Law 118–5;
(3) $204,912,000 shall be derived by transfer
from the unobligated balances of amounts
previously appropriated for fiscal years 2022,
2023, 2024, 2025, and 2026 under the heading
‘‘Office of the Secretary—Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing Transportation
Grant Program’’ in title VIII of division J of
Public Law 117–58: Provided, That amounts
derived by transfer as described in the matter preceding this proviso shall continue to

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

be treated as amounts specified in section
103(b) of division A of Public Law 118–5;
(4) $50,000,000 shall be derived by transfer
from the unobligated balances of amounts
made available by transfer pursuant to section 801 in title VIII of division J of Public
Law 117–58 (excluding amounts transferred to
the Office of Inspector General of the Department of Transportation): Provided, That
amounts derived by transfer as described in
the matter preceding this proviso shall continue to be treated as amounts specified in
section 103(b) of division A of Public Law
118–5; and
(5) $100,000,000 shall be derived by transfer
from the unobligated balances of amounts
previously appropriated for fiscal year 2026
under the heading ‘‘Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration—Natural
Gas Distribution Infrastructure Safety and
Modernization Grant Program’’ in title VIII
of division J of Public Law 117–58 (excluding
amounts transferred to the Office of Inspector General of the Department of Transportation): Provided, That amounts derived by
transfer as described in the matter preceding
this proviso shall continue to be treated as
amounts specified in section 103(b) of division A of Public Law 118–5:
Provided further, That the funds made available under this heading shall be in addition
to any funds provided for fiscal year 2026 in
this or any other Act for: (1) ‘‘Federal-aid
Highways’’ under chapter 1 of title 23, United
States Code; (2) the Appalachian development highway system as authorized under
section 1069(y) of Public Law 102–240; (3) activities eligible under the Tribal transportation program under section 202 of title 23,
United States Code; (4) activities eligible
under the Federal lands transportation program under section 203 of such title; (5) activities eligible under the Federal land access program under section 204 of such title;
(6) the Northern Border Regional Commission (40 U.S.C. 15101 et seq.); (7) the Southwest Border Regional Commission (40 U.S.C.
15101 et seq.); (8) the Denali Commission; or
(9) activities eligible under chapter 5 of title
23, United States Code, and shall not affect
the distribution or amount of funds provided
in any other Act: Provided further, That, except for the funds made available under this
heading for the Northern Border Regional
Commission, the Southwest Border Regional
Commission, and the Denali Commission,
section 11101(e) of Public Law 117–58 shall
apply to funds made available under this
heading: Provided further, That amounts
made available under this heading shall not
be subject to any limitation on obligations
for Federal-aid highways or highway safety
construction programs set forth in any Act
making annual appropriations: Provided further, That of the sums appropriated or otherwise made available under this heading—
(1) $1,514,721,091, which shall be available
until September 30, 2029, shall be for the purposes, and in the amounts, specified for Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending in the table entitled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included for this division
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act): Provided, That
amounts made available in the preceding
proviso for such purposes shall not diminish
or prejudice any application or geographic
region for other discretionary grant or loan
awards made by the Department of Transportation: Provided further, That, except as
otherwise provided under this heading, the
funds made available under this paragraph
shall be administered as if apportioned under
chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code: Provided further, That funds made available
under this paragraph that are used for Tribal

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1241

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

projects shall be administered as if allocated
under chapter 2 of title 23, United States
Code, except that the set-asides described in
subparagraph (C) of section 202(b)(3) of title
23, United States Code, and subsections
(a)(6), (c), and (e) of section 202 of such title,
and section 1123(h)(1) of MAP–21 (as amended
by Public Law 117–58), shall not apply to
such funds;
(2) $200,000,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2029, shall be for activities eligible under the Tribal transportation program, as described in section 202 of title 23,
United States Code: Provided, That, except as
otherwise provided under this heading, the
funds made available under this paragraph
shall be administered as if allocated under
chapter 2 of title 23, United States Code: Provided further, That the set-asides described in
subparagraph (C) of section 202(b)(3) of title
23, United States Code, and subsections
(a)(6), (c), and (e) of section 202 of such title
shall not apply to funds made available
under this paragraph: Provided further, That
the set-aside described in section 1123(h)(1) of
MAP–21 (as amended by Public Law 117–58),
shall not apply to such funds;
(3) $200,000,000, to remain available until
expended, shall be to carry out the Nationally Significant Multimodal Freight and
Highway Projects program under section 117
of title 23, United States Code: Provided,
That the funds made available under this
paragraph shall be for projects to provide
public parking for commercial motor vehicles: Provided further, That such projects
shall be within reasonable access to or in the
right of way of an Interstate highway, the
National Highway System, or the National
Highway Freight Network: Provided further,
That the Secretary shall reserve not less
than 50 percent of the amounts made available under this paragraph to make grants for
projects that do not satisfy the minimum
threshold under section 117(d)(1)(B) of such
title: Provided further, That, of the amount
reserved under the preceding proviso, not
less than 30 percent shall be used for projects
in rural areas: Provided further, That each
grant made with funds reserved under the
third proviso of this paragraph shall be in an
amount that is at least $5,000,000: Provided
further, That in addition to other applicable
requirements, in making grants with funds
reserved under the third proviso of this paragraph, the Secretary shall take into consideration the project selection considerations
described in section 117(e)(3) of such title:
Provided further, That, except as described in
the preceding proviso, subsections (e) and (i)
of section 117 of such title shall not apply to
funds made available under this paragraph:
Provided further, That the Secretary shall reserve not less than 25 percent of the amounts
made available under this paragraph to
make grants for projects located in rural
areas: Provided further, That if qualified applications will not allow for the amount reserved under the preceding proviso to be
fully utilized, the Secretary shall combine
the unutilized amounts with the amounts reserved under the fourth proviso of this paragraph: Provided further, That the requirements in section 117(g) of such title shall not
apply to a project assisted with a grant
under this paragraph that does not meet the
minimum
threshold
under
section
117(d)(1)(B): Provided further, That, except as
described in the following proviso, the Federal share of the cost of a project assisted
with a grant under this paragraph may not
exceed 60 percent: Provided further, That the
Federal share of the cost of a project that
does not meet the minimum threshold under
section 117(d)(1)(B) of such title shall be 80
percent: Provided further, That an eligible applicant that receives a grant under this paragraph may partner with a private entity to

PO 00000

Frm 00067

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

fund the development, capacity expansion, or
operation or maintenance of a facility: Provided further, That no fees may be charged by
an eligible applicant receiving a grant under
this paragraph to a commercial motor vehicle driver to use parking constructed, expanded, opened, maintained, or improved
with a grant under this paragraph: Provided
further, That the funds made available under
this paragraph shall not be used for the construction, or development phase activities
that would enable the construction, of charging or fueling infrastructure for the propulsion of a vehicle, including a commercial
motor vehicle: Provided further, That for purposes of this paragraph, (1) the term ‘‘commercial motor vehicle’’ has the meaning
given the term in section 31132 of title 49,
United States Code, and (2) the term ‘‘rural
area’’ has the meaning given the term in section 117(i)(3) of title 23, United States Code;
(4) $5,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2029, shall be to carry out section
11502 of the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act (23 U.S.C. 148 note): Provided, That,
except as otherwise provided under such section or this heading, the funds made available under this paragraph shall be administered as if apportioned under chapter 1 of
title 23, United States Code;
(5) $5,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2029, shall be to carry out the regional infrastructure accelerator demonstration program under section 1441 of the FAST
Act (23 U.S.C. 601 note): Provided, That for
funds made available under this paragraph,
the Federal share of the costs shall be, at the
option of the recipient, up to 100 percent:
Provided further, That funds made available
under this paragraph may be transferred to
the Office of the Secretary;
(6) $20,000,000 shall be for necessary expenses for construction of the Appalachian
development highway system, as authorized
under section 1069(y) of Public Law 102–240:
Provided, That for the purposes of funds
made available under this paragraph, the
term ‘‘Appalachian State’’ means a State
that contains 1 or more counties (including
any political subdivision located within the
area) in the Appalachian region as defined in
section 14102(a) of title 40, United States
Code: Provided further, That funds made
available under this heading for construction
of the Appalachian development highway
system shall remain available until expended: Provided further, That, except as provided in the following proviso, funds made
available under this heading for construction
of the Appalachian development highway
system shall be administered as if apportioned under chapter 1 of title 23, United
States Code: Provided further, That a project
carried out with funds made available under
this heading for construction of the Appalachian development highway system shall
be carried out in the same manner as a
project under section 14501 of title 40, United
States Code: Provided further, That subject to
the following proviso, funds made available
under this heading for construction of the
Appalachian development highway system
shall be apportioned to Appalachian States
according to the percentages derived from
the 2012 Appalachian development highway
system cost-to-complete estimate, adopted
in Appalachian Regional Commission Resolution Number 736, and confirmed as each
Appalachian State’s relative share of the estimated remaining need to complete the Appalachian development highway system, adjusted to exclude those corridors that such
States have no current plans to complete, as
reported in the 2013 Appalachian Development Highway System Completion Report,
unless those States have modified and assigned a higher priority for completion of an
Appalachian development highway system

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1242

corridor, as reported in the 2020 Appalachian
Development Highway System Future Outlook: Provided further, That the Secretary
shall adjust apportionments made under the
preceding proviso so that no Appalachian
State shall be apportioned an amount in excess of 30 percent of the amount made available for construction of the Appalachian development highway system under this heading: Provided further, That the Secretary
shall consult with the Appalachian Regional
Commission in making adjustments under
the preceding two provisos: Provided further,
That the Federal share of the costs for which
an expenditure is made for construction of
the Appalachian development highway system under this heading shall be up to 100 percent;
(7) $3,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2029, shall be transferred to the
Southwest Border Regional Commission (40
U.S.C. 15101 et seq.) to make grants, in addition to amounts otherwise made available to
the Southwest Border Regional Commission
for such purpose, for authorized activities,
including for administration of grants or cooperative agreements to support interjurisdictional planning activities advancing
transportation infrastructure: Provided, That
a grant made with funds made available
under this paragraph shall be administered
in the same manner as a grant made under
subtitle V of title 40, United States Code;
(8) $5,000,000, to remain available until expended, shall be transferred to the Northern
Border Regional Commission (40 U.S.C. 15101
et seq.) to make grants, in addition to
amounts otherwise made available to the
Northern Border Regional Commission for
such purpose, to carry out pilot projects that
demonstrate the capabilities of wood-based
infrastructure projects: Provided, That a
grant made with funds made available under
this paragraph shall be administered in the
same manner as a grant made under subtitle
V of title 40, United States Code;
(9) $5,000,000 shall be transferred to the
Denali Commission for activities eligible
under section 307(d) of the Denali Commission Act of 1998 (42 U.S.C. 3121 note; Public
Law 105–277): Provided, That funds made
available under this paragraph shall not be
subject to section 311 of such Act: Provided
further, That except as otherwise provided
under section 307(d) of such Act or this heading, funds made available under this paragraph shall be administered as if directly appropriated to the Denali Commission and
subject to applicable provisions of such Act,
including the requirement in section 307(d)
of such Act that the local community provides a 10 percent non-Federal match in the
form of any necessary land or planning and
design funds: Provided further, That such
funds shall be available until expended: Provided further, That the Federal share of the
costs for which an expenditure is made with
funds transferred under this paragraph shall
be up to 90 percent;
(10) $15,000,000 shall be transferred to the
Denali Commission to carry out the Denali
access system program under section 309 of
the Denali Commission Act of 1998 (42 U.S.C.
3121 note; Public Law 105–277): Provided, That
a transfer under this paragraph shall not be
subject to section 311 of such Act: Provided
further, That except as otherwise provided
under this heading, funds made available
under this paragraph shall be administered
as if directly appropriated to the Denali
Commission and subject to applicable provisions of such Act: Provided further, That
funds made available under this paragraph
shall not be subject to section 309(j)(2) of
such Act: Provided further, That funds made
available under this paragraph shall be
available until expended: Provided further,
That the Federal share of the costs for which

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

an expenditure is made with funds transferred under this paragraph shall be up to 100
percent;
(11) $2,000,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2029, shall be to carry out the
pollinator-friendly practices on roadsides
and highway rights-of-way program under
section 332 of title 23, United States Code;
(12) $10,000,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2029, shall be for the national
scenic byways program under section 162 of
title 23, United States Code: Provided, That,
except as otherwise provided under this
heading, the funds made available under this
paragraph shall be administered as if apportioned under chapter 1 of title 23, United
States Code;
(13) $350,000,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2029, shall be for a competitive
highway bridge program for States that—
(A) have—
(i) a population density of less than 115 individuals per square mile; or
(ii) a population of less than 1,100,000 individuals; and
(B) have—
(i) less than 26 percent of total bridges
classified as in good condition; or
(ii) greater than or equal to 4.9 percent of
total bridges classified as in poor condition:
Provided, That any such State with more
than 14 percent of total bridges classified as
in poor condition shall receive not less than
$32,500,000 of the funds made available in this
paragraph for grant applications for projects
eligible under this paragraph: Provided further, That if the Secretary determines that
eligible applications from any such State
meeting the criteria under the preceding proviso are insufficient to make awards of at
least $32,500,000, the Secretary shall use the
unutilized amounts to provide other grants
to States eligible under this paragraph: Provided further, That no State shall be awarded
more than $55,000,000 in awards from funds
made available under this paragraph for
grant applications for projects eligible under
this paragraph: Provided further, That the
funds made available under this paragraph
shall be used for highway bridge replacement
or rehabilitation projects on public roads
that demonstrate cost savings by bundling
multiple highway bridge projects and, except
as otherwise provided in this heading, shall
be administered as if apportioned under
chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code: Provided further, That the requirements of section 144(j)(5) of title 23, United States Code,
shall not apply to funds made available
under this paragraph: Provided further, That
for purposes of this paragraph, the Secretary
shall calculate population and population
density figures based on the latest available
data from the decennial census conducted
under section 141(a) of title 13, United States
Code: Provided further, That for purposes of
this paragraph, the Secretary shall calculate
the percentages of bridge counts (including
the percentages of bridge counts classified as
in poor and good condition) based on the national bridge inventory as of June 2024;
(14) $25,000,000 shall be for a competitive
Type 3 highway bridge program for the replacement or rehabilitation of bridges that—
(A) are owned by a county; (B) are classified
as a Type 3 bridge by the Bureau of Reclamation; (C) are eligible under the Federal lands
access program, as described in section 204 of
title 23, United States Code; and (D) cross a
water conveyance structure owned by the
Bureau of Reclamation: Provided, That the
Secretary, in consultation with the Bureau
of Reclamation, shall prioritize awards to
projects that will lead to—(i) improved water
delivery; (ii) improved bridge conditions; and
(iii) improved safety, efficiency, and reliability of the movement of people and goods
over Type 3 bridges crossing a water convey-

PO 00000

Frm 00068

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ance structure owned by the Bureau of Reclamation: Provided further, That only a county owning a bridge meeting the conditions in
this paragraph shall be an eligible applicant
for a grant under this paragraph: Provided
further, That, except as otherwise provided
under this heading, funds made available
under this paragraph shall be administered
as if allocated under section 204 of such title,
except that such funds shall not be subject
to subsections (b) or (c) of such section: Provided further, That for the purposes of funds
made available under this paragraph, the
term ‘‘Type 3 bridge’’ means a bridge classified as a Type 3 bridge by the Bureau of Reclamation as defined in its Reclamation Manual Directives and Standards FAC 07–01 (as
updated on June 9, 2023): Provided further,
That funds made available under this paragraph shall remain available until expended:
Provided further, That the Federal share of
the costs for which an expenditure is made
with funds made available under this paragraph shall be 100 percent: Provided further,
That the Secretary of Transportation shall
issue the notice of funding opportunity for
the funds made available under this paragraph no later than 60 days after enactment
of this Act: Provided further, That the Secretary of Transportation shall make grants
for the funds made available under this paragraph no later than 270 days after enactment
of this Act;
(15) $6,159,500, to remain available until expended, shall be for research leading to sustainable stormwater management technologies and techniques to reduce the impacts of 6PPD and 6PPD-quinone on salmonbearing streams: Provided, That the Federal
Highway Administration shall implement
this research as specified under the paragraph entitled ‘‘Stormwater Management’’
in Senate Report 119–47; and
(16) $30,000,000, to remain available until
expended, shall be for capital construction
grants under the Reconnecting Communities
Pilot Program as authorized under section
11509(d) of division A of the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58):
Provided, That funds made available under
this paragraph shall only be available for
projects in States in which the Department
of Transportation previously awarded a competitive grant award and signed a grant
agreement of not less than $145,000,000 under
section 177 of title 23, United States Code,
and any amount of such funds were subsequently rescinded by an Act of Congress.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—FEDERAL
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
(INCLUDING RESCISSIONS)

SEC. 120. (a) For fiscal year 2026, the Secretary of Transportation shall—
(1) not distribute from the obligation limitation for Federal-aid highways—
(A) amounts authorized for administrative
expenses and programs by section 104(a) of
title 23, United States Code; and
(B) amounts authorized for the Bureau of
Transportation Statistics;
(2) not distribute an amount from the obligation limitation for Federal-aid highways
that is equal to the unobligated balance of
amounts—
(A) made available from the Highway
Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account) for Federal-aid highway and highway
safety construction programs for previous
fiscal years the funds for which are allocated
by the Secretary (or apportioned by the Secretary under section 202 or 204 of title 23,
United States Code); and
(B) for which obligation limitation was
provided in a previous fiscal year;
(3) determine the proportion that—
(A) the obligation limitation for Federalaid highways, less the aggregate of amounts

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

not distributed under paragraphs (1) and (2)
of this subsection; bears to
(B) the total of the sums authorized to be
appropriated for the Federal-aid highway
and highway safety construction programs
(other than sums authorized to be appropriated for provisions of law described in
paragraphs (1) through (11) of subsection (b)
and sums authorized to be appropriated for
section 119 of title 23, United States Code,
equal to the amount referred to in subsection (b)(12) for such fiscal year), less the
aggregate of the amounts not distributed
under paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection;
(4) distribute the obligation limitation for
Federal-aid highways, less the aggregate
amounts not distributed under paragraphs
(1) and (2), for each of the programs (other
than programs to which paragraph (1) applies) that are allocated by the Secretary
under authorized Federal-aid highway and
highway safety construction programs, or
apportioned by the Secretary under section
202 or 204 of title 23, United States Code, by
multiplying—
(A) the proportion determined under paragraph (3); by
(B) the amounts authorized to be appropriated for each such program for such fiscal
year; and
(5) distribute the obligation limitation for
Federal-aid highways, less the aggregate
amounts not distributed under paragraphs
(1) and (2) and the amounts distributed under
paragraph (4), for Federal-aid highway and
highway safety construction programs that
are apportioned by the Secretary under title
23, United States Code (other than the
amounts apportioned for the national highway performance program in section 119 of
title 23, United States Code, that are exempt
from the limitation under subsection (b)(12)
and the amounts apportioned under sections
202 and 204 of that title) in the proportion
that—
(A) amounts authorized to be appropriated
for the programs that are apportioned under
title 23, United States Code, to each State
for such fiscal year; bears to
(B) the total of the amounts authorized to
be appropriated for the programs that are
apportioned under title 23, United States
Code, to all States for such fiscal year.
(b) EXCEPTIONS FROM OBLIGATION LIMITATION.—The obligation limitation for Federalaid highways shall not apply to obligations
under or for—
(1) section 125 of title 23, United States
Code;
(2) section 147 of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1978 (23 U.S.C. 144
note; 92 Stat. 2714);
(3) section 9 of the Federal-Aid Highway
Act of 1981 (95 Stat. 1701);
(4) subsections (b) and (j) of section 131 of
the Surface Transportation Assistance Act
of 1982 (96 Stat. 2119);
(5) subsections (b) and (c) of section 149 of
the Surface Transportation and Uniform Relocation Assistance Act of 1987 (101 Stat. 198);
(6) sections 1103 through 1108 of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act
of 1991 (105 Stat. 2027);
(7) section 157 of title 23, United States
Code (as in effect on June 8, 1998);
(8) section 105 of title 23, United States
Code (as in effect for fiscal years 1998
through 2004, but only in an amount equal to
$639,000,000 for each of those fiscal years);
(9) Federal-aid highway programs for
which obligation authority was made available under the Transportation Equity Act
for the 21st Century (112 Stat. 107) or subsequent Acts for multiple years or to remain
available until expended, but only to the extent that the obligation authority has not
lapsed or been used;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1243

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(10) section 105 of title 23, United States
Code (as in effect for fiscal years 2005
through 2012, but only in an amount equal to
$639,000,000 for each of those fiscal years);
(11) section 1603 of SAFETEA–LU (23 U.S.C.
118 note; 119 Stat. 1248), to the extent that
funds obligated in accordance with that section were not subject to a limitation on obligations at the time at which the funds were
initially made available for obligation; and
(12) section 119 of title 23, United States
Code (but, for each of fiscal years 2013
through 2026, only in an amount equal to
$639,000,000).
(c) REDISTRIBUTION OF UNUSED OBLIGATION
AUTHORITY.—Notwithstanding subsection (a),
the Secretary shall, after August 1 of such
fiscal year—
(1) revise a distribution of the obligation
limitation made available under subsection
(a) if an amount distributed cannot be obligated during that fiscal year; and
(2) redistribute sufficient amounts to those
States able to obligate amounts in addition
to those previously distributed during that
fiscal year, giving priority to those States
having large unobligated balances of funds
apportioned under sections 144 (as in effect
on the day before the date of enactment of
Public Law 112–141) and 104 of title 23, United
States Code.
(d) APPLICABILITY OF OBLIGATION LIMITATIONS TO TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH PROGRAMS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in
paragraph (2), the obligation limitation for
Federal-aid highways shall apply to contract
authority for transportation research programs carried out under—
(A) chapter 5 of title 23, United States
Code;
(B) title VI of the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation Act; and
(C) title III of division A of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law
117–58).
(2) EXCEPTION.—Obligation authority made
available under paragraph (1) shall—
(A) remain available for a period of 4 fiscal
years; and
(B) be in addition to the amount of any
limitation imposed on obligations for Federal-aid highway and highway safety construction programs for future fiscal years.
(e) REDISTRIBUTION OF CERTAIN AUTHORIZED
FUNDS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 30 days
after the date of distribution of obligation
limitation under subsection (a), the Secretary shall distribute to the States any
funds (excluding funds authorized for the
program under section 202 of title 23, United
States Code) that—
(A) are authorized to be appropriated for
such fiscal year for Federal-aid highway programs; and
(B) the Secretary determines will not be
allocated to the States (or will not be apportioned to the States under section 204 of title
23, United States Code), and will not be
available for obligation, for such fiscal year
because of the imposition of any obligation
limitation for such fiscal year.
(2) RATIO.—Funds shall be distributed
under paragraph (1) in the same proportion
as the distribution of obligation authority
under subsection (a)(5).
(3) AVAILABILITY.—Funds distributed to
each State under paragraph (1) shall be
available for any purpose described in section 133(b) of title 23, United States Code.
SEC. 121. Notwithstanding 31 U.S.C. 3302,
funds received by the Bureau of Transportation Statistics from the sale of data products, for necessary expenses incurred pursuant to chapter 63 of title 49, United States
Code, may be credited to the Federal-aid

PO 00000

Frm 00069

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

highways account for the purpose of reimbursing the Bureau for such expenses.
SEC. 122. Not less than 15 days prior to
waiving, under his or her statutory authority, any Buy America requirement for Federal-aid highways projects, the Secretary of
Transportation shall make an informal public notice and comment opportunity on the
intent to issue such waiver and the reasons
therefor: Provided, That the Secretary shall
post on a website any waivers granted under
the Buy America requirements.
SEC. 123. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used to make a grant for
a project under section 117 of title 23, United
States Code, unless the Secretary, at least 60
days before making a grant under that section, provides written notification to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations of the proposed grant, including an
evaluation and justification for the project
and the amount of the proposed grant award.
SEC. 124. (a) A State or territory, as defined
in section 165 of title 23, United States Code,
may use for any project eligible under section 133(b) of title 23 or section 165 of title 23
and located within the boundary of the State
or territory any earmarked amount, and any
associated obligation limitation: Provided,
That the Department of Transportation for
the State or territory for which the earmarked amount was originally designated or
directed notifies the Secretary of its intent
to use its authority under this section and
submits an annual report to the Secretary
identifying the projects to which the funding
would be applied. Notwithstanding the original period of availability of funds to be obligated under this section, such funds and associated obligation limitation shall remain
available for obligation for a period of 3 fiscal years after the fiscal year in which the
Secretary is notified. The Federal share of
the cost of a project carried out with funds
made available under this section shall be
the same as associated with the earmark.
(b) In this section, the term ‘‘earmarked
amount’’ means—
(1) congressionally directed spending, as
defined in rule XLIV of the Standing Rules
of the Senate, identified in a prior law, report, or joint explanatory statement, which
was authorized to be appropriated or appropriated more than 10 fiscal years prior to the
current fiscal year, and administered by the
Federal Highway Administration; or
(2) a congressional earmark, as defined in
rule XXI of the Rules of the House of Representatives, identified in a prior law, report,
or joint explanatory statement, which was
authorized to be appropriated or appropriated more than 10 fiscal years prior to the
current fiscal year, and administered by the
Federal Highway Administration.
(c) The authority under subsection (a) may
be exercised only for those projects or activities that have obligated less than 10 percent
of the amount made available for obligation
as of October 1 of the current fiscal year, and
shall be applied to projects within the same
general geographic area within 25 miles for
which the funding was designated, except
that a State or territory may apply such authority to unexpended balances of funds from
projects or activities the State or territory
certifies have been closed and for which payments have been made under a final voucher.
(d) The Secretary shall submit consolidated reports of the information provided by
the States and territories annually to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations.
SEC. 125. The remaining unobligated balances, as of September 30, 2026, from
amounts made available for ‘‘Department of
Transportation—Federal Highway Administration—Highway Infrastructure Programs’’
in division J of Public Law 117–58 for the Nationally Significant Freight and Highway

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1244

Projects program under section 117 of title
23, United States Code, for fiscal year 2023
are hereby permanently rescinded, and an
amount of additional new budget authority
equivalent to the amount rescinded pursuant
to this section is hereby appropriated on
September 30, 2026, for an additional amount
for fiscal year 2026, to remain available until
September 30, 2031, and shall be available,
without additional competition, for completing the funding of awards made pursuant
to section 117 of title 23, United States Code,
for fiscal year 2023 funding, in addition to
other funds as may be available for such purposes: Provided, That the amounts rescinded
pursuant to this section that were previously
designated by the Congress as an emergency
requirement pursuant to section 4112(a) of H.
Con. Res. 71 (115th Congress), the concurrent
resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2018,
and to section 251(b) of the Balanced Budget
and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985
are designated by the Congress as an emergency requirement pursuant to 4001(a)(1) of
S. Con. Res 14 (117th Congress), the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year
2022, and to legislation establishing fiscal
year 2026 budget enforcement in the House of
Representatives: Provided further, That the
amount of additional new budget authority
provided by this section is designated by the
Congress as being for an emergency requirement pursuant to such section 4001(a)(1) and
to legislation establishing fiscal year 2026
budget enforcement in the House of Representatives.
SEC. 126. The remaining unobligated balances, as of September 30, 2026, from
amounts made available for ‘‘Department of
Transportation—Federal Highway Administration—Highway Infrastructure Programs’’
in division J of Public Law 117–58 for the
bridge investment program under section 124
of title 23, United States Code, for fiscal year
2023 are hereby permanently rescinded, and
an amount of additional new budget authority equivalent to the amount rescinded pursuant to this section is hereby appropriated
on September 30, 2026, for an additional
amount for fiscal year 2026, to remain available until September 30, 2031, and shall be
available, without additional competition,
for completing the funding of awards made
pursuant to section 124 of title 23, United
States Code, for fiscal year 2023 funding, in
addition to other funds as may be available
for such purposes: Provided, That the
amounts rescinded pursuant to this section
that were previously designated by the Congress as an emergency requirement pursuant
to section 4112(a) of H. Con. Res. 71 (115th
Congress), the concurrent resolution on the
budget for fiscal year 2018, and to section
251(b) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency
Deficit Control Act of 1985 are designated by
the Congress as an emergency requirement
pursuant to 4001(a)(1) of S. Con. Res 14 (117th
Congress), the concurrent resolution on the
budget for fiscal year 2022, and to legislation
establishing fiscal year 2026 budget enforcement in the House of Representatives: Provided further, That the amount of additional
new budget authority provided by this section is designated by the Congress as being
for an emergency requirement pursuant to
such section 4001(a)(1) and to legislation establishing fiscal year 2026 budget enforcement in the House of Representatives.
SEC. 127. The remaining unobligated balances, as of September 30, 2026, from
amounts made available for ‘‘Department of
Transportation—Federal Highway Administration—Highway Infrastructure Programs’’
in division L of Public Law 117–328 for competitive awards for activities eligible under
section 176(d)(4)(A) and 176(d)(4)(C) of title 23,
United States Code, for fiscal year 2023 are
hereby permanently rescinded, and an

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

amount of additional new budget authority
equivalent to the amount rescinded pursuant
to this section is hereby appropriated on
September 30, 2026, for an additional amount
for fiscal year 2026, to remain available until
September 30, 2031, and shall be available,
without additional competition, for completing the funding of awards made pursuant
to section 176 of title 23, United States Code,
for fiscal year 2023 funding, in addition to
other funds as may be available for such purposes.
FEDERAL MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY
ADMINISTRATION
MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY OPERATIONS AND
PROGRAMS
(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

For payment of obligations incurred in the
implementation, execution and administration of motor carrier safety operations and
programs pursuant to section 31110 of title
49, United States Code, as amended by the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
(Public Law 117–58), $390,000,000, to be derived
from the Highway Trust Fund (other than
the Mass Transit Account), together with advances and reimbursements received by the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, the sum of which shall remain available
until expended: Provided, That funds available for implementation, execution, or administration of motor carrier safety operations and programs authorized under title
49, United States Code, shall not exceed total
obligations of $390,000,000, for ‘‘Motor Carrier
Safety Operations and Programs’’ for fiscal
year 2026: Provided further, That of the
amounts made available under this heading—
(1) not less than $63,098,000, to remain
available for obligation until September 30,
2028, shall be for development, modernization, enhancement, and continued operation
and maintenance of information technology
and information management; and
(2) $14,073,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2028, shall be for
the research and technology program:
Provided further, That the activities funded
in paragraphs (1) and (2) in the preceding
proviso may be accomplished through direct
expenditures, direct research activities,
grants, cooperative agreements, contracts,
intra-agency or interagency agreements, or
other agreements with public organizations.
MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY GRANTS
(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

For payment of obligations incurred in
carrying out sections 31102, 31103, 31104, and
31313 of title 49, United States Code,
$536,600,000, to be derived from the Highway
Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account) and to remain available until expended: Provided, That funds available for
the implementation or execution of motor
carrier safety programs shall not exceed
total obligations of $541,600,000 in fiscal year
2026 for ‘‘Motor Carrier Safety Grants’’: Provided further, That of the amounts made
available under this heading—
(1) $422,500,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2027, shall be for
the motor carrier safety assistance program;
(2) $45,200,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2027, shall be for
the commercial driver’s license program implementation program;
(3) $62,400,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2027, shall be for
the high priority program;
(4) $1,500,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2027, shall be for

PO 00000

Frm 00070

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

the commercial motor vehicle operators
grant program; and
(5) $10,000,000, to remain available for obligation until September 30, 2027, shall be for
the commercial motor vehicle enforcement
training and support grant program, of
which $5,000,000 shall be made available from
prior year unobligated contract authority
made available for Motor Carrier Safety
Grants in section 23001 of the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58):
Provided, That such prior year unobligated
contract authority shall be available to complete the fiscal year 2024 commercial motor
vehicle enforcement training and support
grant program notice of funding opportunity
and shall be available to all applicants otherwise eligible under such notice of funding
opportunity.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—FEDERAL MOTOR
CARRIER SAFETY ADMINISTRATION

SEC. 130. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available to the Department
of Transportation by this Act or any other
Act may be obligated or expended to implement, administer, or enforce the requirements of section 31137 of title 49, United
States Code, or any regulation issued by the
Secretary pursuant to such section, with respect to the use of electronic logging devices
by operators of commercial motor vehicles,
as defined in section 31132(1) of such title,
transporting livestock as defined in section
602 of the Emergency Livestock Feed Assistance Act of 1988 (7 U.S.C. 1471) or insects.
SEC. 131. The Secretary shall update the
Department’s regulations to ensure that
non-compliance with section 391.11(b)(2) of
title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, triggers an out-of-service order.
NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY
ADMINISTRATION
OPERATIONS AND RESEARCH
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For expenses necessary to discharge the
functions of the Secretary, with respect to
traffic and highway safety, authorized under
chapter 301 and part C of subtitle VI of title
49, United States Code, $200,000,000, of which
$65,000,000 shall remain available through
September 30, 2027, and of which $129,000,000
shall be derived by transfer from the unobligated balances of amounts previously appropriated in title VIII of division J of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Public
Law 117–58) as follows: (1) $79,000,000 from
amounts previously appropriated for fiscal
years 2023, 2024, 2025, and 2026 in paragraph
(3) under the heading ‘‘Department of Transportation—National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration—Supplemental
Highway
Traffic Safety Programs’’; and (2) $50,000,000
from amounts previously appropriated for
fiscal year 2026 under the heading ‘‘Department of Transportation—National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration—Crash Data’’:
Provided, That amounts derived by transfer
as described in the matter preceding this
proviso shall continue to be treated as
amounts specified in section 103(b) of division A of Public Law 118–5.
OPERATIONS AND RESEARCH
(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

For payment of obligations incurred in
carrying out the provisions of section 403 of
title 23, United States Code, including behavioral research on automated driving systems
and advanced driver assistance systems and
improving consumer responses to safety recalls, section 25024 of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58),
and chapter 303 of title 49, United States
Code, $209,600,000, to be derived from the

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass
Transit Account) and to remain available
until expended: Provided, That none of the
funds in this Act shall be available for the
planning or execution of programs the total
obligations for which, in fiscal year 2026, are
in excess of $209,600,000: Provided further,
That of the sums appropriated under this
heading—
(1) $202,000,000 shall be for programs authorized under section 403 of title 23, United
States Code, including behavioral research
on automated driving systems and advanced
driver assistance systems and improving
consumer responses to safety recalls, and
section 25024 of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58); and
(2) $7,600,000 shall be for the national driver
register authorized under chapter 303 of title
49, United States Code:
Provided further, That within the $209,600,000
obligation limitation for operations and research, $57,500,000 shall remain available
until September 30, 2027, and shall be in addition to the amount of any limitation imposed on obligations for future years: Provided further, That amounts for behavioral
research on automated driving systems and
advanced driver assistance systems and improving consumer responses to safety recalls
are in addition to any other funds provided
for those purposes for fiscal year 2026 in this
Act.
HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY GRANTS
(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)

House and Senate Committees on Appropriations of any exercise of the authority granted under the preceding proviso or under section 405(a)(10) of title 23, United States Code,
within 5 days.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—NATIONAL
HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION

SEC. 140. The limitations on obligations for
the programs of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration set in this Act
shall not apply to obligations for which obligation authority was made available in previous public laws but only to the extent that
the obligation authority has not lapsed or
been used.
SEC. 141. None of the funds provided in this
Act may be used to encourage illegal drug or
alcohol use in the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration’s impaired driving advertising campaigns.
SEC. 142. An additional $130,000 shall be
made available to the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration, out of the
amount limited for section 402 of title 23,
United States Code, to pay for travel and related expenses for State management reviews and to pay for core competency development training and related expenses for
highway safety staff.
FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION
SAFETY AND OPERATIONS

For necessary expenses of the Federal Railroad Administration, not otherwise provided
for, $264,761,000, of which $25,000,000 shall remain available until expended.

(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)

RAILROAD RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

For payment of obligations incurred in
carrying out provisions of sections 402, 404,
and 405 of title 23, United States Code, and
grant administration expenses under chapter
4 of title 23, United States Code, to remain
available until expended, $849,654,625, to be
derived from the Highway Trust Fund (other
than the Mass Transit Account): Provided,
That none of the funds in this Act shall be
available for the planning or execution of
programs for which the total obligations in
fiscal year 2026 are in excess of $849,654,625
for programs authorized under sections 402,
404, and 405 of title 23, United States Code,
and grant administration expenses under
chapter 4 of title 23, United States Code: Provided further, That of the sums appropriated
under this heading—
(1) $393,400,000 shall be for highway safety
programs under section 402 of title 23, United
States Code;
(2) $367,500,000 shall be for national priority
safety programs under section 405 of title 23,
United States Code;
(3) $44,300,000 shall be for the high visibility
enforcement program under section 404 of
title 23, United States Code; and
(4) $44,454,625 shall be for grant administrative expenses under chapter 4 of title 23,
United States Code:
Provided further, That none of these funds
shall be used for construction, rehabilitation, or remodeling costs, or for office furnishings and fixtures for State, local or private buildings or structures: Provided further,
That not to exceed $500,000 of the funds made
available for national priority safety programs under section 405 of title 23, United
States Code, for impaired driving countermeasures (as described in subsection (d) of
that section) shall be available for technical
assistance to the States: Provided further,
That with respect to the ‘‘Transfers’’ provision under section 405(a)(10) of title 23,
United States Code, any amounts transferred
to increase the amounts made available
under section 402 shall include the obligation
authority for such amounts: Provided further,
That the Administrator shall notify the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1245

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

For necessary expenses for railroad research and development, $40,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided,
That of the amounts provided under this
heading, up to $3,000,000 shall be available
pursuant to section 20108(d) of title 49,
United States Code, for the construction, alteration, and repair of buildings and improvements at the Transportation Technology Center: Provided further, That of the
amounts provided under this heading, not
less than $2,500,000 shall be available pursuant to section 20108(j) of title 49, United
States Code, to establish and maintain a center of excellence.
FEDERAL-STATE PARTNERSHIP FOR INTERCITY
PASSENGER RAIL
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses related to FederalState partnership for intercity passenger rail
grants as authorized by section 24911 of title
49, United States Code, $65,000,000, to remain
available until expended: Provided, That the
Secretary may withhold up to 2 percent of
the amounts made available under this heading in this Act for the costs of award and
project management oversight of grants carried out under title 49, United States Code:
Provided further, That of the amounts made
available under this heading, $40,000,000 shall
be derived by transfer from the unobligated
balances of amounts previously appropriated
for fiscal years 2025 and 2026 for the costs of
award and project management oversight of
grants, including amounts transferred to the
‘‘Financial Assistance Oversight and Technical
Assistance’’
account
(excluding
amounts transferred to the Office of Inspector General of the Department of Transportation and to the National Railroad Passenger Corporation Office of Inspector General) under the heading ‘‘Federal Railroad
Administration—Federal-State Partnership
for Intercity Passenger Rail Grants’’ in title
VIII of division J of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58):
Provided further, That amounts transferred
pursuant to the preceding proviso shall continue to be treated as amounts specified in

PO 00000

Frm 00071

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

section 103(b) of division A of Public Law
118–5: Provided further, That, of amounts
made available under this heading, $5,000,000
shall be for a grant to the Union Station Redevelopment Corporation to rehabilitate and
repair the Washington Union Station complex, and section 24911(f)(2) of title 49, United
States Code, shall not apply to that grant.
CONSOLIDATED RAIL INFRASTRUCTURE AND
SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses related to consolidated rail infrastructure and safety improvements grants, as authorized by section 22907
of title 49, United States Code, $137,426,000, to
remain available until expended: Provided,
That of the amounts made available under
this heading in this Act—
(1) $87,426,000 shall be available for the purposes, and in amounts, specified for Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending in the table entitled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included for this division
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act): Provided further,
That amounts made available in the preceding proviso for such purposes shall not diminish or prejudice any application or geographic region for other discretionary grant
or loan awards made by the Department of
Transportation: Provided further, That requirements under subsections (g) and (l) of
section 22907 of title 49, United States Code,
shall not apply to the funds made available
under this paragraph: Provided further, That
any remaining funds available after the distribution of the Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending described in this paragraph shall be available
to the Secretary to distribute as discretionary grants under this heading; and
(2) $50,000,000 shall be available to the Secretary to distribute as discretionary grants
under this heading in this Act:
Provided further, That of the amounts made
available under this heading—
(1) $20,000,000 shall be derived by transfer
from the unobligated balances of amounts
previously appropriated for fiscal year 2026
for the costs of award and project management oversight of grants, including amounts
transferred to the ‘‘Financial Assistance
Oversight and Technical Assistance’’ account (excluding amounts transferred to the
Office of Inspector General of the Department of Transportation and to the National
Railroad Passenger Corporation Office of Inspector General) under the heading ‘‘Federal
Railroad Administration—Consolidated Rail
Infrastructure and Safety Improvements’’ in
title VIII of division J of the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58);
and
(2) $110,000,000 shall be derived by transfer
from the unobligated balances of amounts
previously appropriated for fiscal years 2025
and 2026 for the costs of award and project
management oversight of grants, including
amounts transferred to the ‘‘Financial Assistance Oversight and Technical Assistance’’ account (excluding amounts transferred to the Office of Inspector General of
the Department of Transportation and to the
National Railroad Passenger Corporation Office of Inspector General) under the heading
‘‘Federal Railroad Administration—FederalState Partnership for Intercity Passenger
Rail Grants’’ in title VIII of division J of the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
(Public Law 117–58):
Provided further, That amounts transferred
pursuant to the preceding proviso shall continue to be treated as amounts specified in
section 103(b) of division A of Public Law
118–5: Provided further, That for amounts

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1246

made available under this heading in this
Act,
eligible
projects
under
section
22907(c)(8) of title 49, United States Code,
shall also include railroad systems planning
(including the preparation of regional intercity passenger rail plans and State rail
plans) and railroad project development activities (including railroad project planning,
preliminary engineering, design, environmental analysis, feasibility studies, and the
development and analysis of project alternatives): Provided further, That section
22905(f) of title 49, United States Code, shall
not apply to amounts made available under
this heading in this Act for projects that implement or sustain positive train control
systems otherwise eligible under section
22907(c)(1) of title 49, United States Code:
Provided further, That amounts made available under this heading in this Act for
projects selected for commuter rail passenger transportation may be transferred by
the Secretary, after selection, to the appropriate agencies to be administered in accordance with chapter 53 of title 49, United
States Code: Provided further, That for
amounts made available under this heading
in this Act, eligible recipients under section
22907(b)(7) of title 49, United States Code,
shall include any holding company of a Class
II railroad or Class III railroad (as those
terms are defined in section 20102 of title 49,
United States Code): Provided further, That
section 22907(e)(1)(A) of title 49, United
States Code, shall not apply to amounts
made available under this heading in this
Act:
Provided
further,
That
section
22907(e)(1)(A) of title 49, United States Code,
shall not apply to amounts made available
under this heading in previous fiscal years if
such funds are announced in a notice of funding opportunity that includes funds made
available under this heading in this Act: Provided further, That the preceding proviso
shall not apply to funds made available
under this heading in the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (division J of Public
Law 117–58): Provided further, That unobligated balances remaining after 6 years from
the date of enactment of this Act may be
used for any eligible project under section
22907(c) of title 49, United States Code: Provided further, That the Secretary may withhold up to 2 percent of the amounts made
available under this heading in this Act for
the costs of award and project management
oversight of grants carried out under title 49,
United States Code.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

NORTHEAST CORRIDOR GRANTS TO THE
NATIONAL RAILROAD PASSENGER CORPORATION

To enable the Secretary of Transportation
to make grants to the National Railroad
Passenger Corporation for activities associated with the Northeast Corridor as authorized by section 22101(a) of the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58),
$850,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That the Secretary may retain up to one-half of 1 percent of the
amounts made available under both this
heading in this Act and the ‘‘National Network Grants to the National Railroad Passenger Corporation’’ heading in this Act to
fund the costs of project management and
oversight of activities authorized by section
22101(c) of the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58): Provided further, That in addition to the project management oversight funds authorized under section 22101(c) of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58), the
Secretary
shall
retain
an
additional
$5,000,000 of the amounts made available
under this heading in this Act to fund expenses associated with the Northeast Corridor Commission established under section
24905 of title 49, United States Code.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

NATIONAL NETWORK GRANTS TO THE NATIONAL
RAILROAD PASSENGER CORPORATION

To enable the Secretary of Transportation
to make grants to the National Railroad
Passenger Corporation for activities associated with the National Network as authorized by section 22101(b) of the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58),
$1,577,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That the Secretary shall
retain an additional $3,000,000 of the funds
provided under this heading in this Act to
fund expenses associated with the State-Supported Route Committee established under
section 24712 of title 49, United States Code:
Provided further, That none of the funds provided under this heading in this Act shall be
used by Amtrak to give notice under subsection (a) or (c) of section 24706 of title 49,
United States Code, with respect to long-distance routes (as defined in section 24102 of
title 49, United States Code) on which Amtrak is the sole operator on a host railroad’s
line and a positive train control system is
not required by law or regulation, or, except
in an emergency or during maintenance or
construction outages impacting such routes,
to otherwise discontinue, reduce the frequency of, suspend, or substantially alter the
route of rail service on any portion of such
route operated in fiscal year 2018, including
implementation of service permitted by section 24305(a)(3)(A) of title 49, United States
Code, in lieu of rail service: Provided further,
That the National Railroad Passenger Corporation may use up to $66,000,000 of the
amounts made available under this heading
in this Act for corridor development activities as authorized by section 22101(h) of Public Law 117–58: Provided further, That
$5,000,000 of the amounts made available
under this heading in this Act shall be for
the modernization project identified under
this heading included for this division in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act).
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—FEDERAL
RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)
(INCLUDING RESCISSION)

SEC. 150. The amounts made available to
the Secretary or to the Federal Railroad Administration for the costs of award, administration, and project management oversight
of financial assistance which are administered by the Federal Railroad Administration, in this and prior Acts, may be transferred to the Federal Railroad Administration’s ‘‘Financial Assistance Oversight and
Technical Assistance’’ account for the necessary expenses to support the award, administration, project management oversight,
and technical assistance of financial assistance administered by the Federal Railroad
Administration, in the same manner as appropriated for in this and prior Acts: Provided, That this section shall not apply to
amounts that were previously designated by
the Congress as an emergency requirement
pursuant to a concurrent resolution on the
budget or the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
SEC. 151. None of the funds made available
to the National Railroad Passenger Corporation may be used to fund any overtime costs
in excess of $35,000 for any individual employee: Provided, That the President of Amtrak may waive the cap set in the preceding
proviso for specific employees when the
President of Amtrak determines such a cap
poses a risk to the safety and operational efficiency of the system: Provided further, That
the President of Amtrak shall report to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations no later than 60 days after the date of

PO 00000

Frm 00072

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

enactment of this Act, a summary of all
overtime payments incurred by Amtrak for
2025 and the 3 prior calendar years: Provided
further, That such summary shall include the
total number of employees that received
waivers and the total overtime payments
Amtrak paid to employees receiving waivers
for each month for 2025 and for the 3 prior
calendar years.
SEC. 152. None of the funds made available
to the National Railroad Passenger Corporation under the headings ‘‘Northeast Corridor
Grants to the National Railroad Passenger
Corporation’’ and ‘‘National Network Grants
to the National Railroad Passenger Corporation’’ may be used to reduce the total number of Amtrak Police Department uniformed
officers patrolling on board passenger trains
or at stations, facilities or rights-of-way
below the staffing level on May 1, 2019.
SEC. 153. For amounts made available
under the heading ‘‘Federal-State Partnership for Intercity Passenger Rail’’ for fiscal
year 2026 in this Act and in title VIII of division J of Public Law 117–58, the Union Station Redevelopment Corporation shall be
considered an entity eligible to receive a
grant under section 24911(a) of title 49,
United States Code: Provided, That section
24911(f)(2) of title 49 shall not apply to grants
made available to the Union Station Redevelopment Corporation under the authority
as provided in this section: Provided further,
That the Union Station Redevelopment Corporation and the National Railroad Passenger Corporation shall adhere to Public
Law 97–125 and ensure the historic preservation and improvements to Washington Union
Station are achieved with maximum reliance
on the private sector and minimum requirement for Federal assistance.
SEC. 154. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used by the National
Railroad Passenger Corporation in contravention of the Worker Adjustment and
Retraining Notification Act (29 U.S.C. 2101 et
seq.).
SEC. 155. It is the sense of Congress that—
(1) long-distance passenger rail routes provide much-needed transportation access for
4,200,000 riders in 39 States and the District
of Columbia and are particularly important
in rural areas; and
(2) long-distance passenger rail routes and
services should be sustained to ensure
connectivity throughout the National Network (as defined in section 24102 of title 49,
United States Code).
SEC. 156. Of the unobligated balances of
funds remaining from—
(1) ‘‘Railroad Safety Grants’’ account totaling $795,331.70 appropriated by Public Law
114–113 is hereby permanently rescinded;
(2) ‘‘Grants to the National Railroad Passenger Corporation’’ account totaling $20 appropriated by Public Law 104–50 is hereby
permanently rescinded;
(3) ‘‘Capital Assistance to States—Intercity Passenger Rail Grant Program’’ account
totaling $292,181.41 appropriated by Public
Law 111–8 is hereby permanently rescinded;
(4) ‘‘Capital Assistance for High Speed Rail
Corridors and Intercity Passenger Rail Service’’ account totaling $9,912.54 appropriated
by Public Law 111–117 is hereby permanently
rescinded;
(5) ‘‘Railroad Research and Development’’
account totaling $1,008,385 appropriated by
Public Law 109–115 is hereby permanently rescinded;
(6) ‘‘National Network Grants to the National Railroad Passenger Corporation’’ account totaling $76,633.70 appropriated by
Public Law 115–31 is hereby permanently rescinded;
(7) ‘‘Magnetic Levitation Technology Deployment
Program’’
account
totaling
$14,000,000 appropriated by the following public laws are hereby permanently rescinded:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

(A) Public Law 116–6 a total of $10,000,000;
(B) Public Law 116–94 a total of $2,000,000;
and
(C) Public Law 116–260 a total of $2,000,000;
(8) ‘‘Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and
Safety Improvements’’ account totaling
$5,000,000 appropriated by Public Law 117–328
for preconstruction planning activities and
capital costs related to the deployment of
magnetic levitation transportation projects
is hereby permanently rescinded; and
(9) ‘‘Capital Assistance for High Speed Rail
Corridors and Intercity Passenger Rail Service’’ account totaling $928,620,000 appropriated by Public Law 111–117 is hereby permanently rescinded.
FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION
TRANSIT FORMULA GRANTS
(LIQUIDATION OF CONTRACT AUTHORIZATION)
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(HIGHWAY TRUST FUND)

For payment of obligations incurred in the
Federal public transportation assistance program in this account, and for payment of obligations incurred in carrying out the provisions of 49 U.S.C. 5305, 5307, 5310, 5311, 5312,
5314, 5318, 5329(e)(6), 5334, 5335, 5337, 5339, and
5340, section 20005(b) of Public Law 112–141,
and section 3006(b) of Public Law 114–94,
$14,642,000,000, to be derived from the Mass
Transit Account of the Highway Trust Fund
and to remain available until expended: Provided, That funds available for the implementation or execution of programs authorized under 49 U.S.C. 5305, 5307, 5310, 5311, 5312,
5314, 5318, 5329(e)(6), 5334, 5335, 5337, 5339, and
5340, section 20005(b) of Public Law 112–141,
and section 3006(b) of Public Law 114–94, shall
not exceed total obligations of $14,642,000,000
in fiscal year 2026.
TRANSIT INFRASTRUCTURE GRANTS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For an additional amount for ferry boat
grants under section 5307(h) of title 49,
United States Code, bus testing facilities
under section 5318 of such title, accelerating
innovative mobility initiative grants under
section 5312 of such title, Community
Project Funding/Congressionally Directed
Spending for projects and activities eligible
under chapter 53 of such title, ferry service
for rural communities under section 71103 of
division G of Public Law 117–58, and operating assistance to improve public safety in
transit systems, $211,423,390, to remain available until expended: Provided, That of the
sums provided under this heading in this
Act—
(1) $25,000,000 shall be available for ferry
boat grants as authorized under section
5307(h) of such title: Provided, That of the
amounts provided in this paragraph, no less
than $4,000,000 shall be available for low or
zero emission ferries or ferries using electric
battery or fuel cell components and the infrastructure to support such ferries;
(2) $1,500,000 shall be available for the operation and maintenance of the bus testing facilities selected under section 5318 of such
title;
(3) $2,000,000 shall be available for the accelerating innovative mobility initiative as
authorized under section 5312 of title 49,
United States Code: Provided, That such
amounts shall be available for competitive
grants to improve mobility and enhance the
rider experience with a focus on innovative
service delivery models, creative financing,
novel partnerships, and integrated payment
solutions in order to help disseminate proven
innovation mobility practices throughout
the public transportation industry;
(4) $147,923,390 shall be available for the
purposes, and in the amounts, specified for
Community Project Funding/Congressionally

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1247

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Directed Spending in the table entitled
‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act): Provided, That amounts made available in this
paragraph for such purposes shall not diminish or prejudice any application or geographic region for other discretionary grant
or loan awards made by the Department of
Transportation: Provided further, That unless
otherwise specified, applicable requirements
under chapter 53 of title 49, United States
Code, shall apply to amounts made available
in this paragraph, except that the Federal
share of the costs for a project in this paragraph shall be in an amount equal to 80 percent of the net costs of the project, unless
the Secretary approves a higher maximum
Federal share of the net costs of the project
consistent with administration of similar
projects funded under chapter 53 of title 49,
United States Code;
(5) $20,000,000 shall be available for ferry
service for rural communities under section
71103 of division G of Public Law 117–58: Provided, That for amounts made available in
this paragraph, notwithstanding section
71103(a)(2)(B), eligible service shall include
passenger ferry service that serves at least
two rural areas with a single segment over 15
miles between the two rural areas: Provided
further, That for (1) amounts made available
in this paragraph, (2) unobligated balances
from amounts made available pursuant to
section 1101(a)(12) of division A of the FullYear Continuing Appropriations and Extensions Act, 2025 (Public Law 119–4) for ferry
service for rural communities previously appropriated in paragraph (5) under this heading in division F of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 (Public Law 118–42), and
(3) unobligated balances from amounts made
available in paragraph (5) under this heading
in division F of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 (Public Law 118–42), notwithstanding section 71103(e)(2), eligible service
shall include passenger ferry service that receives funds apportioned under chapter 53 of
title 49, United States Code: Provided further,
That entities that provide eligible service
pursuant to the preceding two provisos may
use amounts made available in this paragraph for public transportation capital
projects to support any ferry service between
two rural areas; and
(6) $15,000,000 shall be available for costs related to operating equipment and facilities
for use in public transportation to improve
public safety in transit systems: Provided,
That the Secretary shall provide amounts
made available in this paragraph as if such
amounts were provided under section 5307 of
title 49, United States Code, as applicable:
Provided further, That notwithstanding subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of section 5307 of such
title, amounts made available in this paragraph shall be available for the operating
cost of equipment and facilities for use in
public transportation eligible under section
5307 of such title: Provided further, That
amounts made available in this paragraph
shall be for eligible recipients under section
5307 of such title for such operating costs to
improve public safety, reduce crime, and increase security in transit systems: Provided
further, That the Secretary shall allocate
amounts made available in this paragraph to
the 10 eligible recipients with the highest
ridership in fiscal year 2024: Provided further,
That amounts shall be provided to eligible
recipients proportionally based on ridership
in fiscal year 2024: Provided further, That no
eligible recipient may receive an allocation
of more than 50 percent of the total amounts
made available in this paragraph: Provided
further, That the Secretary shall allocate

PO 00000

Frm 00073

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

any excess funds above the 50 percent threshold in the preceding proviso to all other eligible recipients in this paragraph proportionally based on ridership in fiscal year
2024: Provided further, That the Secretary
shall allocate amounts made available in
this paragraph to eligible recipients no later
than 30 days after the date of enactment of
this Act:
Provided further, That amounts made available under this heading shall be derived from
the general fund, of which—
(1) $40,795,000 shall be derived from
amounts previously appropriated for fiscal
year 2026 for administrative and oversight
expenses as authorized under section 5334
and section 5338(c) of title 49, United States
Code, (excluding amounts transferred to the
Office of Inspector General of the Department of Transportation) under the heading
‘‘Federal Transit Administration—Transit
Infrastructure Grants’’ in title VIII of division J of the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58);
(2) $4,975,000 shall be derived by transfer
from the unobligated balances of amounts
previously appropriated for fiscal years 2022,
2023, 2024, 2025, and 2026 for administrative
and oversight expenses as authorized under
section 5334 and section 5338(c) of title 49,
United States Code, (excluding amounts
transferred to the Office of Inspector General
of the Department of Transportation) under
the heading ‘‘Federal Transit Administration—Electric or Low-Emitting Ferry Program’’ in title VIII of division J of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Public
Law 117–58);
(3) $4,601,000 shall be derived by transfer
from the unobligated balances of amounts
previously appropriated for fiscal years 2022,
2023, 2024, 2025, and 2026 for administrative
and oversight expenses as authorized under
section 5334 and section 5338(c) of title 49,
United States Code, (excluding amounts
transferred to the Office of Inspector General
of the Department of Transportation) under
the heading ‘‘Federal Transit Administration—Ferry Service for Rural Communities’’
in title VIII of division J of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law
117–58); and
(4) $138,000,000 shall be derived by transfer
from the unobligated balances of amounts
previously appropriated for fiscal years 2025
and 2026 for the costs of award and project
management oversight of grants, including
amounts transferred to the ‘‘Financial Assistance Oversight and Technical Assistance’’ account (excluding amounts transferred to the Office of Inspector General of
the Department of Transportation and to the
National Railroad Passenger Corporation Office of Inspector General) under the heading
‘‘Federal Railroad Administration—FederalState Partnership for Intercity Passenger
Rail Grants’’ in title VIII of division J of the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
(Public Law 117–58):
Provided further, That amounts transferred
pursuant to the preceding proviso shall continue to be treated as amounts specified in
section 103(b) of division A of Public Law
118–5: Provided further, That amounts made
available under this heading in this Act shall
not be subject to any limitation on obligations for transit programs set forth in this or
any other Act.
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING

For necessary expenses to carry out section 5314 of title 49, United States Code,
$7,500,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That the assistance
provided under this heading does not duplicate the activities of section 5311(b) or section 5312 of title 49, United States Code: Provided further, That amounts made available

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1248

under this heading are in addition to any
other amounts made available for such purposes: Provided further, That amounts made
available under this heading shall not be
subject to any limitation on obligations set
forth in this or any other Act.
CAPITAL INVESTMENT GRANTS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses to carry out fixed
guideway capital investment grants under
section 5309 of title 49, United States Code,
and section 3005(b) of the Fixing America’s
Surface Transportation Act (Public Law 114–
94), $1,700,000,000, to remain available until
expended: Provided, That of the sums appropriated under this heading in this Act—
(1) $1,357,300,000 shall be available for
projects authorized under section 5309(d) of
title 49, United States Code;
(2) $200,000,000 shall be available for
projects authorized under section 5309(e) of
title 49, United States Code;
(3) $25,700,000 shall be available for projects
authorized under section 5309(h) of title 49,
United States Code; and
(4) $100,000,000 shall be available for
projects authorized under section 3005(b) of
the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation
Act:
Provided further, That the amounts made
available under this heading in this or any
prior appropriations Act shall be available
for the purposes, and in amounts, specified in
the table entitled ‘‘Allocation of FTA Capital Investment Grants Funding’’ included
for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided further, That the Secretary
shall make allocations for amounts made
available under this heading in this or any
prior appropriations Act in accordance with
the table referred to in the second proviso
under this heading in this Act no later than
120 days after the enactment of this Act: Provided further, That not to exceed 10 percent
of any funding level specified in the table referred to in the second proviso under this
heading in this Act may be transferred to
any other funding level specified in such
table: Provided further, That no transfer of
such funding levels may increase or decrease
any funding level in the table referred to in
the second proviso under this heading in this
Act by more than 10 percent: Provided further, That the preceding two provisos shall
not apply to projects with full funding grant
agreements under section 5309(d) of title 49,
United States Code, included in the table referred to in the second proviso under this
heading in this Act: Provided further, That
for funds made available under this heading
in division J of Public Law 117–58 the second
through sixth provisos shall be treated as inapplicable for fiscal year 2026: Provided further, That for funds made available under
this heading in division J of Public Law 117–
58, $734,900,000 may be available for projects
authorized under section 5309(d) of title 49,
United States Code: Provided further, That
for funds made available under this heading
in division J of Public Law 117–58, $849,500,000
may be available for projects authorized
under section 5309(h) of title 49, United
States Code: Provided further, That amounts
repurposed under this heading in this Act
shall continue to be treated as amounts specified in section 103(b) of division A of Public
Law 118–5: Provided further, That the Secretary shall continue to administer the capital investment grants program in accordance with the procedural and substantive requirements of section 5309 of title 49, United
States Code, and of section 3005(b) of the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation Act:
Provided further, That projects that receive a
grant agreement under the expedited project

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

delivery for capital investment grants pilot
program under section 3005(b) of the Fixing
America’s Surface Transportation Act shall
be deemed eligible for funding provided for
projects under section 5309 of title 49, United
States Code, without further evaluation or
rating under such section: Provided further,
That such funding shall not exceed the Federal share under section 3005(b).
GRANTS TO THE WASHINGTON METROPOLITAN
AREA TRANSIT AUTHORITY

For grants to the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority as authorized
under section 601 of division B of the Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement
Act of 2008 (Public Law 110–432), $150,000,000,
to remain available until expended: Provided,
That the Secretary of Transportation shall
approve grants for capital and preventive
maintenance expenditures for the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority
only after receiving and reviewing a request
for each specific project: Provided further,
That the Secretary shall determine that the
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority has placed the highest priority on
those investments that will improve the
safety of the system before approving such
grants.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—FEDERAL
TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 160. The limitations on obligations for
the programs of the Federal Transit Administration shall not apply to any authority
under 49 U.S.C. 5338, previously made available for obligation, or to any other authority
previously made available for obligation.
SEC. 161. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, funds appropriated or limited by
this Act under the heading ‘‘Capital Investment Grants’’ of the Federal Transit Administration for projects specified in this Act
not obligated by September 30, 2029, and
other recoveries, shall be directed to projects
eligible to use the funds for the purposes for
which they were originally provided.
SEC. 162. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any funds appropriated before
October 1, 2025, under any section of chapter
53 of title 49, United States Code, that remain available for expenditure, may be
transferred to and administered under the
most recent appropriation heading for any
such section.
SEC. 163. None of the funds made available
by this Act or any other Act shall be used to
adjust apportionments or withhold funds
from apportionments pursuant to section
9503(e)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986 (26 U.S.C. 9503(e)(4)).
SEC. 164. None of the funds made available
by this Act or any other Act shall be used to
impede or hinder project advancement or approval for any project seeking a Federal contribution from the capital investment grants
program of greater than 40 percent of project
costs as authorized under section 5309 of title
49, United States Code.
SEC. 165. Of the unobligated balances made
available for the following programs authorized by Public Law 109–59, the Secretary
shall make $94,316,766 available for transportation assistance, including assistance with
transit planning, capital projects, and operating assistance, for surface, commuter, and
public transportation systems necessary to
support the mobility needs of the international
quadrennial
Olympic
and
Paralympic events as authorized by section
1223(e) of Public Law 105–178—
(1) ‘‘Alternatives Analysis Program’’ under
section 5339 of title 49, United States Code;
(2) ‘‘bus and bus-related equipment and facilities’’ under section 5309 of title 49, United
States Code; and

PO 00000

Frm 00074

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(3) ‘‘Alternative Transportation in Parks
and Public Lands’’ under section 5320 of title
49, United States Code:
Provided, That such assistance shall be for
any eligible entity as defined by section 6702
of title 49, United States Code, that serves or
supports service to a venue that is part of
the 2028 international quadrennial Olympic
or Paralympic events: Provided further, That
such assistance may be provided through direct grants or cooperative agreements for
which the Federal share shall not exceed 80
percent, with the exception of assistance for
a supplemental public transportation bus
system which shall be no less than 90 percent: Provided further, That these amounts
shall be in addition to other amounts made
available for such purpose: Provided further,
That amounts made available in this section
may be transferred to other operating administrations of the Department to administer the amounts made available in this section as appropriate: Provided further, That
amounts made available in this section shall
only be available for obligation for the purposes specifically authorized in this section
in this Act for a period not to exceed 2 fiscal
years after the official closing of the 2028
international quadrennial Olympic and
Paralympic events.
SEC. 166. Of the unobligated balances made
available for the following programs authorized by Public Law 109–59 and Public Law
105–178, the Secretary shall make $100,250,212
available for grants to transit agencies for
costs related to eligible planning, capital,
and operating expenses for equipment and facilities in support of matches or other public
events held in domestic host cities for the
FIFA World Cup 2026—
(1) ‘‘Clean Fuels Grant Program’’ under
section 5308 of title 49, United States Code;
(2) ‘‘Job Access and Reverse Commute Formula Grants’’ under section 5316 of title 49,
United States Code;
(3) ‘‘New Freedom’’ under section 5317 of
title 49, United States Code, as amended by
Public Law 109–59; and
(4) ‘‘Rural Transportation Accessibility Incentive Program’’ under section 3038 of Public Law 105–178:
Provided, That the Secretary shall apportion
such amounts not later than 30 days after enactment of this Act so that the transit agencies in each of the domestic host cities for
the FIFA World Cup 2026 are each entitled to
receive an amount equal to—
(1) 70 percent of the total amount apportioned multiplied by a ratio equal to the
FIFA estimated stadium capacity of the host
stadium at the time of apportionment divided by the total FIFA estimated stadium
capacity of all host stadiums at the time of
apportionment; and
(2) 30 percent of the total amount apportioned multiplied by a ratio equal to the
number of matches to be held in the host
stadium divided by the total number of
matches to be held in all host cities in the
United States:
Provided further, That notwithstanding subsection (a)(1) or (b) of section 5307 of title 49,
United States Code, amounts made available
in this section are available for the planning,
capital, and operating expenses of transit
agencies for hosting matches or other public
events held in domestic host cities for the
FIFA World Cup 2026, eligible under section
5307 of title 49, United States Code: Provided
further, That such planning, capital, and operating expenses are not required to be included in a transportation improvement program, long-range transportation, statewide
transportation plan, or a statewide transportation improvement program: Provided further, That the Secretary shall not waive the
requirements of section 5333 of title 49,
United States Code, for amounts made available in this section: Provided further, That

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

unless otherwise specified, applicable requirements under chapter 53 of title 49,
United States Code, shall apply to amounts
made available in this section, except that
the Federal share of the costs for which any
grant is made according to this section shall
be, at the option of the recipient, up to 100
percent: Provided further, That amounts
made available in this section shall only be
available for obligation for the purposes specifically authorized in this section in this
Act for a period not to exceed 1 fiscal year
after the official closing of the FIFA World
Cup 2026 events.
GREAT LAKES ST. LAWRENCE SEAWAY
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
The Great Lakes St. Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation is hereby authorized
to make such expenditures, within the limits
of funds and borrowing authority available
to the Corporation, and in accord with law,
and to make such contracts and commitments without regard to fiscal year limitations, as provided by section 9104 of title 31,
United States Code, as may be necessary in
carrying out the programs set forth in the
Corporation’s budget for the current fiscal
year.
OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE
(HARBOR MAINTENANCE TRUST FUND)

For necessary expenses to conduct the operations, maintenance, and capital infrastructure activities on portions of the St.
Lawrence Seaway owned, operated, and
maintained by the Great Lakes St. Lawrence
Seaway
Development
Corporation,
$38,080,000, to be derived from the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund, pursuant to section 210 of the Water Resources Development
Act of 1986 (33 U.S.C. 2238): Provided, That of
the amounts made available under this heading, not less than $15,950,000 shall be for the
seaway infrastructure program.
MARITIME ADMINISTRATION
MARITIME SECURITY PROGRAM
(INCLUDING RESCISSION)

For necessary expenses to maintain and
preserve a U.S.-flag merchant fleet as authorized under chapter 531 of title 46, United
States Code, to serve the national security
needs of the United States, $390,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided,
That of the unobligated balances remaining
from fiscal year 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024, and 2025
appropriations made available under this
heading, $38,400,000 are hereby permanently
rescinded.
CABLE SECURITY FLEET
(INCLUDING RESCISSION)

For the cable security fleet program, as
authorized under chapter 532 of title 46,
United States Code, $10,000,000, to remain
available until expended: Provided, That of
the unobligated balances remaining from fiscal year 2021 and 2022 appropriations made
available under this heading, $12,392,000 are
hereby permanently rescinded.
TANKER SECURITY PROGRAM

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING RESCISSION)

For Tanker Security Fleet payments, as
authorized under section 53406 of title 46,
United States Code, $81,600,000, to remain
available until expended: Provided, That of
the unobligated balances remaining from fiscal year 2022, 2023, and 2024 appropriations
made available under this heading, $42,808,000
are hereby permanently rescinded.

(2) $50,000,000 shall remain available until
expended for facilities maintenance and repair, and equipment, at the United States
Merchant Marine Academy;
(3) $50,000,000 shall remain available until
expended for the capital improvement program at the United States Merchant Marine
Academy;
(4) $2,000,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2027, for the maritime environmental and technical assistance program authorized under section 50307 of title 46,
United States Code; and
(5) $5,000,000 shall remain available until
expended, for the United States marine highway program to make grants for the purposes authorized under section 55601 of title
46, United States Code:
Provided further, That the Administrator of
the Maritime Administration shall transmit
to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations the annual report on sexual assault and sexual harassment at the United
States Merchant Marine Academy as required pursuant to section 3510 of the National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal
year 2017 (46 U.S.C. 51318): Provided further,
That the Administrator of the Maritime Administration shall transmit to the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations an annual capital improvement program plan not
later than 30 days after the submission of the
budget request: Provided further, That available balances under this heading for the
short sea transportation program or America’s marine highway program (now known
as the United States marine highway program) from prior year recoveries shall be
available to carry out activities authorized
under section 55601 of title 46, United States
Code.
STATE MARITIME ACADEMY OPERATIONS

For necessary expenses of operations, support, and training activities for State Maritime Academies, $138,900,000: Provided, That
of the sums appropriated under this heading—
(1) $7,800,000 shall remain available until
expended for maintenance, repair, and life
extension of training ships at the State Maritime Academies;
(2) $110,000,000 shall remain available until
expended for the national security multimission vessel program, of which—
(A) not less than $55,000,000 shall be for
necessary expenses to design, plan, construct
infrastructure, and purchase equipment necessary to berth such ships, as determined by
the Secretary: Provided, That such funds
may be used to reimburse State Maritime
Academies for costs incurred prior to the
date of enactment of this Act; and
(B) up to $55,000,000 shall be for expenses
related to the operation, integration, oversight, and management of national security
multi-mission vessel school ships, including
insurance, maintenance, repair, and equipment costs;
(3) $4,800,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2030, for the student incentive
program;
(4) $9,300,000 shall remain available until
expended for training ship fuel assistance;
and
(5) $7,000,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2027, for direct payments for
State Maritime Academies: Provided, That
each institution eligible for such payments
receives no more than $1,000,000.

OPERATIONS AND TRAINING

ASSISTANCE TO SMALL SHIPYARDS

For necessary expenses of operations and
training activities authorized by law,
$275,791,000: Provided, That of the sums appropriated under this heading—
(1) $101,500,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2027, for the operations of the
United States Merchant Marine Academy;

To make grants to qualified shipyards as
authorized under section 54101 of title 46,
United States Code, $35,000,000, to remain
available until expended.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1249

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

SHIP DISPOSAL

For necessary expenses related to the disposal of obsolete vessels in the National De-

PO 00000

Frm 00075

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

fense Reserve Fleet of the Maritime Administration, $6,000,000, to remain available until
expended.
MARITIME GUARANTEED LOAN (TITLE XI)
PROGRAM ACCOUNT
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For administrative expenses to carry out
the guaranteed loan program, $3,940,000,
which shall be transferred to and merged
with the appropriations for ‘‘Maritime Administration—Operations and Training’’.
PORT INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM

To make grants to improve port facilities
as authorized under section 54301 of title 46,
United States Code, and section 3501(b) of the
National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2026 (Public Law 119–60), $103,330,000,
to remain available until expended: Provided,
That of the sums appropriated under this
heading in this Act—
(1) $38,628,000 shall be for projects for coastal seaports, inland river ports, or Great
Lakes ports: Provided, That for grants awarded under this paragraph in this Act, the minimum grant size shall be $1,000,000; and
(2) $64,702,000 shall be for the purposes, and
in the amounts, specified for Community
Project Funding/Congressionally Directed
Spending in the table entitled ‘‘Community
Project Funding/Congressionally Directed
Spending’’ included for this division in the
explanatory statement described in section 4
(in the matter preceding division A of this
consolidated Act): Provided, That amounts
made available in this paragraph for such
purposes shall not diminish or prejudice any
applicant or geographic region for other discretionary grant or loan awards made by the
Department of Transportation.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS—MARITIME
ADMINISTRATION
(INCLUDING RESCISSION)

SEC. 170. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, in addition to any existing
authority, the Maritime Administration is
authorized to furnish utilities and services
and make necessary repairs in connection
with any lease, contract, or occupancy involving Government property under control
of the Maritime Administration: Provided,
That payments received therefor shall be
credited to the appropriation charged with
the cost thereof and shall remain available
until expended: Provided further, That rental
payments under any such lease, contract, or
occupancy for items other than such utilities, services, or repairs shall be deposited
into the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts.
SEC. 171. Of the unobligated balances from
prior year appropriations available under the
heading ‘‘Maritime Administration—Maritime Guaranteed Loan (Title XI) Program
Account’’, $34,000,000 are hereby rescinded.
PIPELINE AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY
ADMINISTRATION
OPERATIONAL EXPENSES

For necessary operational expenses of the
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, $28,647,000, of which $4,500,000
shall remain available until September 30,
2028: Provided, That not less than $2,000,000 of
the amounts made available under this heading shall be for pipeline safety information
grants to communities as authorized under
section 60130 of title 49, United States Code:
Provided further, That the Secretary shall
issue a notice of funding opportunity for
such funds not later than 120 days after enactment of this Act.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY

For expenses necessary to discharge the
hazardous materials safety functions of the
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, $66,050,000, of which $8,570,000

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1250

shall remain available until September 30,
2028, of which $1,000,000 shall be made available for carrying out section 5107(i) of title
49, United States Code: Provided, That up to
$800,000 in fees collected under section 5108(g)
of title 49, United States Code, shall be deposited in the general fund of the Treasury
as offsetting receipts: Provided further, That
there may be credited to this appropriation,
to be available until expended, funds received from States, counties, municipalities,
other public authorities, and private sources
for expenses incurred for training, for reports publication and dissemination, and for
travel expenses incurred in performance of
hazardous materials exemptions and approvals functions.
PIPELINE SAFETY
(PIPELINE SAFETY FUND)
(OIL SPILL LIABILITY TRUST FUND)

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

For expenses necessary to carry out a pipeline safety program, as authorized by section
60107 of title 49, United States Code, and to
discharge the pipeline program responsibilities of the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 (Public
Law 101–380), $214,807,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2028, of which $30,000,000
shall be derived from the Oil Spill Liability
Trust Fund; of which $177,407,000 shall be derived from the Pipeline Safety Fund; of
which $200,000 shall be derived from the fees
collected under section 60303 of title 49,
United States Code, and deposited in the Liquefied Natural Gas Siting Account for compliance reviews of liquefied natural gas facilities; of which $200,000 shall be derived
from the fees collected under section 60117, of
title 49, United States Code, and deposited in
the Pipeline Safety Design Review Account
for facility design safety reviews; and of
which $7,000,000 shall be derived from fees
collected under section 60302 of title 49,
United States Code, and deposited in the Underground Natural Gas Storage Facility
Safety Account for the purpose of carrying
out section 60141 of title 49, United States
Code: Provided, That not less than $1,058,000
of the amounts made available under this
heading shall be for the one-call state grant
program: Provided further, That any amounts
made available under this heading in this
Act or in prior Acts for research contracts,
grants, cooperative agreements or research
other transactions agreements (OTAs) shall
require written notification to the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations not
less than 3 full business days before such research contracts, grants, cooperative agreements, or research OTAs are announced by
the Department of Transportation: Provided
further, That the Secretary shall transmit to
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations the report on pipeline safety testing enhancement as required pursuant to
section 105 of the Protecting our Infrastructure of Pipelines and Enhancing Safety Act
of 2020 (division R of Public Law 116–260):
Provided further, That the Secretary may obligate amounts made available under this
heading to engineer, erect, alter, and repair
buildings or make any other public improvements for research facilities at the Transportation Technology Center after the Secretary submits an updated research plan and
the report in the preceding proviso to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations and after such plan and report in the
preceding proviso are approved by the House
and Senate Committees on Appropriations:
Provided further, That of the amounts made
available under this heading, not less than
$5,000,000 is for the National Center of Excellence for Liquefied Natural Gas Safety authorized under section 111 of the Protecting
Our Infrastructure of Pipelines and Enhancing Safety Act of 2020 (PIPES) Act.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS GRANTS
(LIMITATION ON OBLIGATIONS)
(EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS FUND)

For expenses necessary to carry out the
Emergency Preparedness Grants program,
not more than $46,825,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2028, from amounts
made available by section 5116(h) and subsections (b) and (c) of section 5128 of title 49,
United States Code: Provided, That notwithstanding section 5116(h)(4) of title 49, United
States Code, not more than 4 percent of the
amounts made available from this account
shall be available to pay the administrative
costs of carrying out sections 5116, 5107(e),
and 5108(g)(2) of title 49, United States Code:
Provided further, That notwithstanding subsections (b) and (c) of section 5128 of title 49,
United States Code, and the limitation on
obligations provided under this heading,
prior year recoveries recognized in the current year shall be available to develop and
deliver hazardous materials emergency response training for emergency responders,
including response activities for the transportation of crude oil, ethanol, flammable
liquids, and other hazardous commodities by
rail, consistent with National Fire Protection Association standards, and to make
such training available through an electronic format: Provided further, That the
prior year recoveries made available under
this heading shall also be available to carry
out sections 5116(a)(1)(C), 5116(h), 5116(i),
5116(j), and 5107(e) of title 49, United States
Code.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General to carry out the provisions
of the Inspector General Act of 1978, as
amended, $113,000,000: Provided, That the Inspector General shall have all necessary authority, in carrying out the duties specified
in the Inspector General Act, as amended (5
U.S.C. App.), to investigate allegations of
fraud, including false statements to the government (18 U.S.C. 1001), by any person or entity that is subject to regulation by the Department of Transportation: Provided further,
That none of the funds made available by
this Act or any other Act shall be used to
impede or prevent the Inspector General (or
Acting Inspector General) of the Department
of Transportation from exercising the independent authority over all personnel decisions, as authorized under section 406 of title
5, United States Code.
GENERAL PROVISIONS—DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION
SEC. 180. (a) During the current fiscal year,
applicable appropriations to the Department
of Transportation shall be available for
maintenance and operation of aircraft; hire
of passenger motor vehicles and aircraft;
purchase of liability insurance for motor vehicles operating in foreign countries on official department business; and uniforms or allowances therefor, as authorized by sections
5901 and 5902 of title 5, United States Code.
(b) During the current fiscal year, applicable appropriations to the Department and its
operating administrations shall be available
for the purchase, maintenance, operation,
and deployment of unmanned aircraft systems that advance the missions of the Department of Transportation or an operating
administration of the Department of Transportation.
(c) Any unmanned aircraft system purchased, procured, or contracted for by the
Department prior to the date of enactment
of this Act shall be deemed authorized by
Congress as if this provision was in effect
when the system was purchased, procured, or
contracted for.

PO 00000

Frm 00076

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SEC. 181. Appropriations contained in this
Act for the Department of Transportation
shall be available for services as authorized
by section 3109 of title 5, United States Code,
but at rates for individuals not to exceed the
per diem rate equivalent to the rate for an
Executive Level IV.
SEC. 182. (a) No recipient of amounts made
available by this Act shall disseminate personal information (as defined in section
2725(3) of title 18, United States Code) obtained by a State department of motor vehicles in connection with a motor vehicle
record as defined in section 2725(1) of title 18,
United States Code, except as provided in
section 2721 of title 18, United States Code,
for a use permitted under section 2721 of title
18, United States Code.
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a), the
Secretary shall not withhold amounts made
available by this Act for any grantee if a
State is in noncompliance with this provision.
SEC. 183. None of the funds made available
by this Act shall be available for salaries and
expenses of more than 125 political and Presidential appointees in the Department of
Transportation: Provided, That none of the
personnel covered by this provision may be
assigned on temporary detail outside the Department of Transportation.
SEC. 184. Funds received by the Federal
Highway Administration and Federal Railroad Administration from States, counties,
municipalities, other public authorities, and
private sources for expenses incurred for
training may be credited respectively to the
Federal Highway Administration’s ‘‘FederalAid Highways’’ account and to the Federal
Railroad Administration’s ‘‘Safety and Operations’’ account, except for State rail safety
inspectors participating in training pursuant
to section 20105 of title 49, United States
Code.
SEC. 185. None of the funds made available
by this Act or in title VIII of division J of
Public Law 117–58 to the Department of
Transportation may be used to make, withdraw, terminate, or rescind (except at the request of the recipient) a loan, loan guarantee, line of credit, letter of intent, federally funded cooperative agreement, full funding grant agreement, or discretionary grant
unless the Secretary of Transportation notifies the House and Senate Committees on
Appropriations not less than 3 full business
days before any project competitively selected to receive any discretionary grant
award, letter of intent, loan commitment,
loan guarantee commitment, line of credit
commitment, federally funded cooperative
agreement, or full funding grant agreement
is announced or is notified of such changes
by the Department or its operating administrations: Provided, That the Secretary of
Transportation shall provide the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations with a
comprehensive list of all such loans, loan
guarantees, lines of credit, letters of intent,
federally funded cooperative agreements, full
funding grant agreements, and discretionary
grants prior to the notification required
under the preceding proviso: Provided further,
That the Secretary gives concurrent notification to the House and Senate Committees
on Appropriations for any ‘‘quick release’’ of
funds from the emergency relief program:
Provided further, That no notification shall
involve funds that are not available for obligation.
SEC. 186. Rebates, refunds, incentive payments, minor fees, and other funds received
by the Department of Transportation from
travel management centers, charge card programs, the subleasing of building space, and
miscellaneous sources are to be credited to
appropriations of the Department of Transportation and allocated to organizational

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

units of the Department of Transportation
using fair and equitable criteria and such
funds shall be available until expended.
SEC. 187. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if any funds provided by or limited by this Act are subject to a reprogramming action that requires notice to be provided to the House and Senate Committees
on Appropriations, transmission of such reprogramming notice shall be provided solely
to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations, and such reprogramming action shall be approved or denied solely by the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations: Provided, That the Secretary of Transportation may provide notice to other congressional committees of the action of the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations on such reprogramming but not sooner
than 30 days after the date on which the reprogramming action has been approved or
denied by the House and Senate Committees
on Appropriations.
SEC. 188. Funds appropriated by this Act to
the operating administrations may be obligated for the Office of the Secretary for the
costs related to assessments or reimbursable
agreements only when such amounts are for
the costs of goods and services that are purchased to provide a direct benefit to the applicable operating administration or administrations.
SEC. 189. The Secretary of Transportation
is authorized to carry out a program that establishes uniform standards for developing
and supporting agency transit pass and transit benefits authorized under section 7905 of
title 5, United States Code, including distribution of transit benefits by various paper
and electronic media.
SEC. 190. The Department of Transportation may use funds provided by this Act, or
any other Act, to assist a contract under
title 49 or 23 of the United States Code utilizing geographic, economic, or any other
hiring preference not otherwise authorized
by law, or to amend a rule, regulation, policy
or other measure that forbids a recipient of
a Federal Highway Administration or Federal Transit Administration grant from imposing such hiring preference on a contract
or construction project with which the Department of Transportation is assisting, only
if the grant recipient certifies the following:
(1) that except with respect to apprentices
or trainees, a pool of readily available but
unemployed
individuals
possessing
the
knowledge, skill, and ability to perform the
work that the contract requires resides in
the jurisdiction;
(2) that the grant recipient will include appropriate provisions in its bid document ensuring that the contractor does not displace
any of its existing employees in order to satisfy such hiring preference; and
(3) that any increase in the cost of labor,
training, or delays resulting from the use of
such hiring preference does not delay or displace any transportation project in the applicable statewide transportation improvement program or transportation improvement program.
SEC. 191. The Secretary of Transportation
shall coordinate with the Secretaries of
Homeland Security and Commerce to ensure
that best practices for Industrial Control
Systems Procurement are up-to-date and are
considered for all systems procured with
funds provided under this title.
SEC. 192. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used in contravention of
the American Security Drone Act of 2023
(subtitle B of title XVIII of division A of
Public Law 118–31).
SEC. 193. None of the funds appropriated or
made available by this title for the Department of Transportation for fiscal year 2026
may be used to enforce a mask mandate in
response to the COVID–19 virus.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1251

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

SEC. 194. The Secretary shall issue a new
notice of funding opportunity for six new
university transportation centers, as authorized under section 5505 of title 49, United
States Code: Provided, That in selecting such
university transportation center awards, the
Secretary shall first prioritize (a) any applicants that had previously been selected as a
university transportation center focusing on
transportation infrastructure durability and
composite materials and were required to recompete before the end of the typical 5-year
term and who currently participate in the
Department of Transportation’s Advanced
Research Projects Agency—Infrastructure
program and (b) any applicant that had their
university transportation center designation
cancelled in May 2025 by the Department of
Transportation and such university transportation center designation remains cancelled on the date of enactment of this Act:
Provided further, That such university transportation center awards shall be made available using any unobligated amounts remaining from the university transportation centers program, which have not been committed to any existing university transportation center grantees: Provided further, That
any such unobligated amounts shall include
funds made available in section 11101(c)(1)(E)
of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act (Public Law 117–58) and funds made
available under the heading ‘‘Federal Highway Administration—Highway Infrastructure Programs’’ in title VIII of division J of
the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
(Public Law 117–58): Provided further, That
amounts repurposed or transferred pursuant
to this section shall continue to be treated
as amounts specified in section 103(b) of division A of Public Law 118–5.
This title may be cited as the ‘‘Department
of Transportation Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
TITLE II
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION

(6) $40,000,000 shall be available for the Office of Field Policy and Management;
(7) $3,300,000 shall be available for the Office of Departmental Equal Employment Opportunity; and
(8) $55,000,000 shall be available for the Office of the Chief Information Officer:
Provided further, That funds made available
under this heading may be used for necessary
administrative and non-administrative expenses of the Department, not otherwise provided for, including purchase of uniforms, or
allowances therefor, as authorized by sections 5901 and 5902 of title 5, United States
Code; hire of passenger motor vehicles; and
services as authorized by section 3109 of title
5, United States Code: Provided further, That
notwithstanding any other provision of law,
funds appropriated under this heading may
be used for advertising and promotional activities that directly support program activities funded in this title: Provided further,
That none of the funds made available by
this or any prior Act may be used in contravention of section 3535(p) of title 42,
United States Code.
PROGRAM OFFICES

For necessary salaries and expenses for
Program Offices, $842,500,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027: Provided,
That of the sums appropriated under this
heading—
(1) $233,000,000 shall be available for the Office of Public and Indian Housing;
(2) $129,000,000 shall be available for the Office of Community Planning and Development;
(3) $380,000,000 shall be available for the Office of Housing;
(4) $31,500,000 shall be available for the Office of Policy Development and Research;
(5) $60,000,000 shall be available for the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity;
and
(6) $9,000,000 shall be available for the Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy
Homes.

EXECUTIVE OFFICES

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FUND

For necessary salaries and expenses for Executive Offices, which shall be comprised of
the offices of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Adjudicatory Services, Congressional
and Intergovernmental Relations, Public Affairs, Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization, and the Center for Faith, $17,500,000,
to remain available until September 30, 2027:
Provided, That of the sums appropriated
under this heading not less than $2,500,000
shall be for the Office of the Deputy Secretary, of which not less than $500,000 shall
be for the Office of Gender-Based Violence
Prevention and not less than $1,500,000 shall
be for the Office of Disaster Management:
Provided further, That not to exceed $25,000 of
the amount made available under this heading shall be available to the Secretary of
Housing and Urban Development (referred to
in this title as ‘‘the Secretary’’) for official
reception and representation expenses as the
Secretary may determine.
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT OFFICES

For necessary salaries and expenses for Administrative Support Offices, $595,000,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2027:
Provided, That of the sums appropriated
under this heading—
(1) $103,200,000 shall be available for the Office of the Chief Financial Officer;
(2) $93,000,000 shall be available for the Office of the General Counsel;
(3) $218,000,000 shall be available for the Office of Administration;
(4) $53,000,000 shall be available for the Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer;
(5) $29,500,000 shall be available for the Office of the Chief Procurement Officer;

PO 00000

Frm 00077

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

For Department-wide and program-specific
information technology systems and infrastructure, $345,000,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2028: Provided, That not
later than 30 days after the end of each quarter, the Secretary shall brief the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations on all
information technology modernization efforts as required in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act).
WORKING CAPITAL FUND
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For the working capital fund for the Department of Housing and Urban Development
(referred to in this paragraph as the
‘‘Fund’’), pursuant, in part, to section 7(f) of
the Department of Housing and Urban Development Act (42 U.S.C. 3535(f)), amounts
transferred, including reimbursements pursuant to section 7(f), to the Fund under this
heading shall be available only for Federal
shared services used by offices and agencies
of the Department, and for any such portion
of any office or agency’s printing, records
management, space renovation, furniture, or
supply services the Secretary has determined shall be provided through the Fund,
and the operational expenses of the Fund:
Provided, That amounts within the Fund
shall not be available to provide services not
specifically authorized under this heading:
Provided further, That upon a determination
by the Secretary that any other service (or
portion thereof) authorized under this heading shall be provided through the Fund,

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1252

amounts made available in this title for salaries and expenses under the headings ‘‘Executive Offices’’, ‘‘Administrative Support Offices’’, ‘‘Program Offices’’, and ‘‘Government
National Mortgage Association’’, for such
services shall be transferred to the Fund, to
remain available until expended: Provided
further, That the Secretary shall notify the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations of its plans for executing such transfers
at least 15 days in advance of such transfers.
PUBLIC AND INDIAN HOUSING
TENANT-BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE
For activities and assistance for the provision of tenant-based rental assistance authorized under the United States Housing
Act of 1937, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1437 et
seq.) (in this heading ‘‘the Act’’), not otherwise provided for, $34,438,557,000, to remain
available until expended, which shall be
available on October 1, 2025 (in addition to
the $4,000,000,000 previously appropriated
under this heading that shall be available on
October 1, 2025), and $4,000,000,000, to remain
available until expended, which shall be
available on October 1, 2026: Provided, That of
the sums appropriated under this heading—
(1) $34,957,000,000 shall be available for renewals of expiring section 8 tenant-based annual contributions contracts (including renewals of enhanced vouchers under any provision of law authorizing such assistance
under section 8(t) of the Act) and including
renewal of other special purpose incremental
vouchers: Provided, That notwithstanding
any other provision of law, from amounts
provided under this paragraph and any carryover, the Secretary for the calendar year
2026 funding cycle shall provide renewal
funding for each public housing agency based
on validated voucher management system
(VMS) or successor system leasing and cost
data for the prior calendar year and by applying an inflation factor as established by
the Secretary, by notice published in the
Federal Register, and by making any necessary adjustments for the costs associated
with the first-time renewal of vouchers
under this paragraph including tenant protection and choice neighborhoods vouchers:
Provided further, That none of the funds provided under this paragraph may be used to
fund a total number of unit months under
lease which exceeds a public housing agency’s authorized level of units under contract,
except for public housing agencies participating in the moving to work (MTW) demonstration, which are instead governed in accordance with the requirements of the MTW
demonstration program or their MTW agreements, if any, or as necessary on a temporary basis and within available resources
to facilitate the transition of residents assisted by emergency housing vouchers (Public Law 117–2; 135 Stat. 58) to tenant-based
rental assistance under the housing assistance payment contract under section 8(o) of
the Act: Provided further, That any leasing or
associated costs authorized for emergency
housing vouchers in the preceding proviso
above the public housing agency’s authorized
level of units under contract shall not be included in the calculation of the agency’s renewal funding allocation for any subsequent
fiscal year: Provided further, That the Secretary shall, to the extent necessary to stay
within the amount specified under this paragraph (except as otherwise modified under
this paragraph), prorate each public housing
agency’s allocation otherwise established
pursuant to this paragraph: Provided further,
That except as provided in the following provisos, the entire amount specified under this
paragraph (except as otherwise modified
under this paragraph) shall be obligated to
the public housing agencies based on the allocation and pro rata method described

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

above, and the Secretary shall notify public
housing agencies of their annual budget by
the latter of 60 days after enactment of this
Act or March 1, 2026: Provided further, That
the Secretary may extend the notification
period only after the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations are notified at
least 10 business days in advance of the deadline: Provided further, That public housing
agencies participating in the MTW demonstration shall be funded in accordance
with the requirements of the MTW demonstration program or their MTW agreements, if any, and shall be subject to the
same pro rata adjustments under the preceding provisos: Provided further, That the
Secretary may perform a statutory offset of
public housing agencies’ calendar year 2026
allocations based on the excess amounts of
public housing agencies’ net restricted assets
accounts, including HUD-held programmatic
reserves (in accordance with VMS or successor system data in calendar year 2025 that
is verifiable and complete), as determined by
the Secretary: Provided further, That public
housing agencies participating in the MTW
demonstration shall also be subject to the
statutory offset: Provided further, That for
amounts subject to the single fund budget
authority provisions of their MTW agreements, excess amounts shall be offset only to
the extent permitted by section 239 of the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016 (Public Law 114–113): Provided further, That for
public housing agencies in the MTW demonstration subject to single fund budget authority provisions, the Secretary shall provide not less than 60 days to appeal such offsets and shall not offset amounts that have
been committed to capital improvement, development, and other repositioning activities that are scheduled to close within 12
months of enactment of this Act, as evidenced in funding applications, project
schedules, or other commitments to third
parties implementing such activities, to the
extent that reserve amounts excluded from
offset under such section 239 are insufficient
to cover such commitments: Provided further,
That the Secretary shall not offset any portion of a public housing agency’s excess
amounts if offsetting such portion would result in a public housing agency being put in
a shortfall position in calendar year 2026, as
estimated by HUD prior to the offset’s implementation, as determined by the Secretary:
Provided further, That the Secretary shall use
any such offset amounts referred to in the
preceding five provisos throughout the calendar year to prevent the termination of
rental assistance for families as the result of
insufficient funding, as determined by the
Secretary, and to avoid or reduce the proration of renewal funding allocations: Provided
further, That the Secretary may waive or
specify alternative requirements for section
5A and section 8(o) of the Act or any regulation applicable to such statutes related to
the administration of waiting lists, local
preferences, portability, and public housing
agency plan and public hearing requirements
to facilitate or expedite the transition of
residents assisted by emergency housing
vouchers (Public Law 117–2; 135 Stat. 58) to
tenant-based rental assistance under the
housing assistance payment contract under
section 8(o) of the Act: Provided further, That
up to $400,000,000 shall be available only:
(A) for adjustments in the allocations for
public housing agencies, after application for
an adjustment by a public housing agency
that experienced a significant increase, as
determined by the Secretary, in renewal
costs of vouchers resulting from unforeseen
circumstances or from portability under section 8(r) of the Act;
(B) for vouchers that were not in use during the previous 12-month period in order to

PO 00000

Frm 00078

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

be available to meet a commitment pursuant
to section 8(o)(13) of the Act, or an adjustment for a funding obligation not yet expended in the previous calendar year for a
MTW-eligible activity to develop affordable
housing for an agency added to the MTW
demonstration under the expansion authority provided in section 239 of the Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and
Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2016
(division L of Public Law 114–113);
(C) for adjustments for costs associated
with HUD–Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (HUD–VASH) vouchers;
(D) for public housing agencies that despite
taking reasonable cost savings measures, as
determined by the Secretary, would otherwise be required to terminate rental assistance for families as a result of insufficient
funding;
(E) for adjustments in the allocations for
public housing agencies that—
(i) are leasing a lower-than-average percentage of their authorized vouchers,
(ii) have low amounts of budget authority
in their net restricted assets accounts and
HUD-held programmatic reserves, relative to
other agencies, and
(iii) are not participating in the MTW demonstration, to enable such agencies to lease
more vouchers;
(F) for withheld payments in accordance
with section 8(o)(8)(A)(ii) of the Act for
months in the previous calendar year that
were subsequently paid by the public housing
agency after the agency’s actual costs were
validated;
(G) for public housing agencies that have
experienced increased costs or loss of units
in an area for which the President declared a
disaster under title IV of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5170 et seq.); and
(H) for costs associated with mainstream
vouchers:
Provided further, That the Secretary shall allocate amounts under the preceding proviso
based on need, as determined by the Secretary;
(2) $600,622,000 shall be available for section
8 rental assistance for relocation and replacement of housing units that are demolished or disposed of pursuant to section 18 of
the Act, conversion of section 23 projects to
assistance under section 8, relocation of witnesses (including victims of violent crimes)
in connection with efforts to combat crime
in public and assisted housing pursuant to a
request from a law enforcement or prosecution agency, enhanced vouchers under any
provision of law authorizing such assistance
under section 8(t) of the Act, choice neighborhood vouchers, mandatory and voluntary
conversions, and tenant protection assistance including replacement and relocation
assistance or for project-based assistance to
prevent the displacement of unassisted elderly tenants currently residing in section 202
properties financed between 1959 and 1974
that are refinanced pursuant to Public Law
106–569, as amended, or under the authority
as provided under this Act: Provided, That
when a public housing development is submitted for demolition or disposition under
section 18 of the Act, the Secretary may provide section 8 rental assistance when the
units pose an imminent health and safety
risk to residents: Provided further, That the
Secretary may provide section 8 rental assistance from amounts made available under
this paragraph for units assisted under a
project-based subsidy contract funded under
the ‘‘Project-Based Rental Assistance’’ heading under this title where the owner has received a Notice of Default and the units pose
an imminent health and safety risk to residents: Provided further, That of the amounts
made available under this paragraph, no less

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

than $5,000,000 may be available to provide
tenant protection assistance, not otherwise
provided under this paragraph, to residents
residing in low vacancy areas and who may
have to pay rents greater than 30 percent of
household income, as the result of: (A) the
maturity of a HUD-insured, HUD-held or section 202 loan that requires the permission of
the Secretary prior to loan prepayment; (B)
the expiration of a rental assistance contract
for which the tenants are not eligible for enhanced voucher or tenant protection assistance under existing law; or (C) the expiration
of affordability restrictions accompanying a
mortgage or preservation program administered by the Secretary: Provided further,
That such tenant protection assistance made
available under the preceding proviso may be
provided under the authority of section 8(t)
or section 8(o)(13) of the Act: Provided further, That any tenant protection voucher
made available from amounts under this
paragraph shall not be reissued by any public
housing agency, except the replacement
vouchers as defined by the Secretary by notice, when the initial family that received
any such voucher no longer receives such
voucher, and the authority for any public
housing agency to issue any such voucher
shall cease to exist: Provided further, That
the Secretary may only provide replacement
vouchers for units that were occupied within
the previous 24 months that cease to be
available as assisted housing, subject only to
the availability of funds: Provided further,
That amounts made available under this
paragraph may be available to provide calendar year 2026 assistance to public housing
agencies that would otherwise be required to
terminate emergency housing vouchers (Public Law 117–2; 135 Stat. 58) for families as a
result of insufficient funding;
(3) $2,835,935,000 shall be available for administrative and other expenses of public
housing agencies in administering the section 8 tenant-based rental assistance program, of which up to $30,000,000 shall be
available to the Secretary to allocate to public housing agencies that need additional
funds to administer their section 8 programs,
including fees associated with section 8 tenant protection rental assistance, the administration of disaster related vouchers, HUD–
VASH vouchers, and other special purpose
incremental vouchers: Provided, That no less
than $2,805,935,000 of the amount provided in
this paragraph shall be allocated to public
housing agencies for the calendar year 2026
funding cycle based on section 8(q) of the Act
(and related appropriations Act provisions)
as in effect immediately before the enactment of the Quality Housing and Work Responsibility Act of 1998 (Public Law 105–276):
Provided further, That if the amounts made
available under this paragraph are insufficient to pay the amounts determined under
the preceding proviso, the Secretary may decrease the amounts allocated to agencies by
a uniform percentage applicable to all agencies receiving funding under this paragraph
or may, to the extent necessary to provide
full payment of amounts determined under
the preceding proviso, utilize unobligated
balances, including recaptures and carryover, remaining from funds appropriated
under this heading from prior fiscal years,
excluding special purpose vouchers, notwithstanding the purposes for which such
amounts were appropriated: Provided further,
That all public housing agencies participating in the MTW demonstration shall be
funded in accordance with the requirements
of the MTW demonstration program or their
MTW agreements, if any, and shall be subject to the same uniform percentage decrease as under the preceding proviso: Provided further, That amounts provided under
this paragraph shall be only for activities re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1253

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

lated to the provision of tenant-based rental
assistance authorized under section 8, including related development activities;
(4) $15,000,000 shall be available for incremental rental voucher assistance for use
through a supported housing program administered in conjunction with the Department
of Veterans Affairs as authorized under section 8(o)(19) of the United States Housing
Act of 1937: Provided, That the Secretary of
Housing and Urban Development shall make
such funding available, notwithstanding section 203 (competition provision) of this title,
to public housing agencies that partner with
eligible VA medical centers or other entities
as designated by the Secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs, based on geographical need for such assistance as identified by the Secretary of the Department of
Veterans Affairs, public housing agency administrative performance, and other factors
as specified by the Secretary of Housing and
Urban Development in consultation with the
Secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs: Provided further, That the Secretary of
Housing and Urban Development may waive,
or specify alternative requirements for (in
consultation with the Secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs), any provision
of any statute or regulation that the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
administers in connection with the use of
funds made available under this paragraph
(except for requirements related to fair housing, nondiscrimination, labor standards, and
the environment), upon a finding by the Secretary that any such waivers or alternative
requirements are necessary for the effective
delivery and administration of such voucher
assistance: Provided further, That assistance
made available under this paragraph shall
continue to remain available for homeless
veterans upon turn-over: Provided further,
That of the total amount made available
under this paragraph, up to $10,000,000 may
be for additional fees established by and allocated pursuant to a method determined by
the Secretary for administrative and other
expenses (including those eligible activities
defined by notice to facilitate leasing, such
as security deposit assistance and costs related to the retention and support of participating owners) of public housing agencies in
administering HUD–VASH vouchers;
(5) $30,000,000 shall be available for the family unification program as authorized under
section 8(x) of the Act: Provided, That the
amounts made available under this paragraph are provided as follows:
(A) $5,000,000 shall be available for new incremental voucher assistance, which shall
continue to remain available for family unification upon turnover; and
(B) $25,000,000 shall be available for new incremental voucher assistance to assist eligible youth as defined by such section
8(x)(2)(B) of the Act, which shall continue to
remain available for such eligible youth
upon turnover: Provided, That such amounts
shall be available on a noncompetitive basis
to public housing agencies that partner with
public child welfare agencies to identify such
eligible youth, that request such assistance
to timely assist such eligible youth, and that
meet any other criteria as specified by the
Secretary: Provided further, That the Secretary shall review utilization of such assistance and assistance originating from appropriations made available for youth under
this heading in any prior Act that the Secretary made available on a noncompetitive
basis, at an interval to be determined by the
Secretary, and unutilized voucher assistance
that is no longer needed based on such review shall be recaptured by the Secretary
and reallocated pursuant to the preceding
proviso:

PO 00000

Frm 00079

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Provided further, That any public housing
agency administering new incremental
voucher assistance originating from appropriations made available for the family unification program under this heading in this
or any prior Act that the Secretary made
available on a competitive basis that determines it no longer has an identified need for
such assistance upon turnover shall notify
the Secretary, and the Secretary shall recapture such assistance from the agency and reallocate it to any other public housing agency or agencies based on need for voucher assistance in connection with such specified
program or eligible youth, as applicable; and
(6) the Secretary shall separately track all
special purpose vouchers funded under this
heading and continue to provide timely updates on budget, utilization, spending and
leasing trends for all vouchers by purpose on
the voucher data dashboard on the publicly
accessible website of the Department: Provided, That upon turnover, special purpose
vouchers issued pursuant to section 811 of
the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable
Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 8013) funded under
this or any other heading in this or prior
Acts, shall be provided to non-elderly persons with disabilities.
HOUSING CERTIFICATE FUND
(INCLUDING RESCISSIONS)

Unobligated balances, including recaptures
and carryover, remaining from funds appropriated to the Department of Housing and
Urban Development under this heading, the
heading ‘‘Annual Contributions for Assisted
Housing’’ and the heading ‘‘Project-Based
Rental Assistance’’, for fiscal year 2026 and
prior years may be used for renewal of or
amendments to section 8 project-based contracts and for performance-based contract
administrators, notwithstanding the purposes for which such funds were appropriated: Provided, That any obligated balances of contract authority from fiscal year
1974 and prior fiscal years that have been terminated shall be rescinded: Provided further,
That amounts heretofore recaptured, or recaptured during the current fiscal year, from
section 8 project-based contracts from source
years fiscal year 1975 through fiscal year 1987
are hereby rescinded, and an amount of additional new budget authority, equivalent to
the amount rescinded is hereby appropriated,
to remain available until expended, for the
purposes set forth under this heading, in addition to amounts otherwise available.
PUBLIC HOUSING FUND

For 2026 payments to public housing agencies for the operation and management of
public housing, as authorized by section 9(e)
of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42
U.S.C. 1437g(e)) (the ‘‘Act’’), and to carry out
capital and management activities for public
housing agencies, as authorized under section 9(d) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 1437g(d)),
$8,319,393,000, to remain available until September 30, 2029: Provided, That of the sums
appropriated under this heading—
(1) $4,687,393,000 shall be available for the
Secretary to allocate pursuant to the operating fund formula at part 990 of title 24,
Code of Federal Regulations, for 2026 payments;
(2) $337,000,000 shall be available for the
Secretary to allocate pursuant to a needbased application process, notwithstanding
section 203 of this title, not subject to such
operating fund formula, and without regard
to unit count, to public housing agencies
that experience, or are at risk of, financial
shortfalls, as determined by the Secretary:
Provided, That the Secretary shall notify
public housing agencies of their estimated
shortfall eligibility no later than 60 days of
the enactment of this Act;

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1254

(3) $3,200,000,000 shall be available for the
Secretary to allocate pursuant to the capital
fund formula at section 905.400 of title 24,
Code of Federal Regulations: Provided, That
for funds described under this paragraph, the
limitation in section 9(g)(1) of the Act shall
be 25 percent: Provided further, That the Secretary may waive the limitation in the preceding proviso to allow public housing agencies to fund activities authorized under section 9(e)(1)(C) of the Act: Provided further,
That the Secretary shall notify public housing agencies requesting waivers under the
preceding proviso if the request is approved
or denied within 14 days of submitting the
request: Provided further, That from the
funds made available under this paragraph,
the Secretary shall provide bonus awards in
fiscal year 2026 to public housing agencies
that are designated high performers: Provided further, That the Department shall notify public housing agencies of their formula
allocation within 60 days of enactment of
this Act;
(4) $30,000,000 shall be available for the Secretary to make grants, notwithstanding section 203 of this title, to public housing agencies for emergency capital needs, including
safety and security measures necessary to
address crime and drug-related activity, as
well as needs resulting from unforeseen or
unpreventable emergencies and natural disasters excluding Presidentially declared
emergencies and natural disasters under the
Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Act (42 U.S.C. 5121 et seq.) occurring in
fiscal year 2026: Provided, That of the amount
made available under this paragraph, not
less than $10,000,000 shall be for safety and
security measures: Provided further, That in
addition to the amount in the preceding proviso for such safety and security measures,
any amounts that remain available, after all
applications received on or before September
30, 2027, for emergency capital needs have
been processed, shall be allocated to public
housing agencies for such safety and security
measures;
(5) $50,000,000 shall be available for competitive grants to public housing agencies to
evaluate and reduce residential health hazards in public housing, including lead-based
paint (by carrying out the activities of risk
assessments, abatement, and interim controls, as those terms are defined in section
1004 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint
Hazard Reduction Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C.
4851b)), carbon monoxide, mold, radon, and
fire safety: Provided, That not less than
$25,000,000 of the amounts provided under
this paragraph shall be awarded for evaluating and reducing lead-based paint hazards,
except that if such amount is undersubscribed any remaining amounts may be
awarded to qualified applicants for other
purposes under this paragraph: Provided further, That for purposes of environmental review, a grant under this paragraph shall be
considered funds for projects or activities
under title I of the Act for purposes of section 26 of the Act (42 U.S.C. 1437x) and shall
be subject to the regulations implementing
such section; and
(6) $15,000,000 shall be available to support
the costs of administrative and judicial receiverships and for competitive grants to
public housing agencies in receivership, designated troubled or substandard, or otherwise at risk, as determined by the Secretary,
for costs associated with public housing
asset improvement, in addition to other
amounts for that purpose provided under any
heading under this title:
Provided further, That notwithstanding any
other provision of law or regulation, during
fiscal year 2026, the Secretary of Housing and
Urban Development may not delegate to any
Department official other than the Deputy

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Secretary and the Assistant Secretary for
Public and Indian Housing any authority
under paragraph (2) of section 9(j) of the Act
regarding the extension of the time periods
under such section: Provided further, That for
purposes of such section 9(j), the term ‘‘obligate’’ means, with respect to amounts, that
the amounts are subject to a binding agreement that will result in outlays, immediately or in the future: Provided further,
That the Secretary may authorize a public
housing agency with at least one property
with a low physical inspection score to use
operating reserve funds or any amounts allocated to such agency pursuant to the operating fund formula from amounts made
available in this and prior Acts for any eligible activities under section 9(d)(1) of the
United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C.
1437g(d)(1)) under such conditions or criteria
as established by the Secretary, including
that such use would not put such agency at
risk of financial shortfall.
ASSISTED HOUSING INSPECTIONS AND RISK
ASSESSMENTS

For the Department’s inspection and assessment programs, including travel, training,
and
program
support
contracts,
$50,000,000 to remain available until September 30, 2028: Provided, That unobligated
balances, including recaptures and carryover, remaining from funds appropriated
under the heading ‘‘Public Housing Fund’’ in
prior Acts to support ongoing public housing
financial and physical assessment activities
shall be available for the purposes authorized
under this heading in addition to the purposes for which such funds originally were
appropriated.
CHOICE NEIGHBORHOODS INITIATIVE

For competitive grants under the choice
neighborhoods initiative (subject to section
24 of the United States Housing Act of 1937
(42 U.S.C. 1437v) (the ‘‘Act’’) unless otherwise
specified under this heading), for transformation, rehabilitation, and replacement
housing needs of both public and HUD-assisted housing and to transform neighborhoods of poverty into functioning, sustainable, mixed-income neighborhoods with appropriate services, schools, public assets,
transportation,
and
access
to
jobs,
$25,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2030: Provided, That grant funds
may be used for resident and community
services, community development, and affordable housing needs in the community,
and for conversion of vacant or foreclosed
properties to affordable housing: Provided
further, That the use of amounts made available under this heading shall not be deemed
to be for public housing, notwithstanding
section 3(b)(1) of the Act: Provided further,
That grantees shall commit to an additional
period of affordability determined by the
Secretary of not fewer than 20 years: Provided further, That grantees shall provide a
match in State, local, other Federal, or private funds: Provided further, That grantees
may include local governments, Tribal entities, public housing agencies, and nonprofit
organizations: Provided further, That forprofit developers may apply jointly with a
public entity: Provided further, That for purposes of environmental review, a grantee
shall be treated as a public housing agency
under section 26 of the Act (42 U.S.C. 1437x),
and grants made with amounts available
under this heading shall be subject to the
regulations issued by the Secretary to implement such section: Provided further, That of
the amounts made available under this heading, not less than $12,500,000 shall be awarded
to public housing agencies: Provided further,
That such grantees shall create partnerships
with other local organizations, including assisted housing owners, service agencies, and

PO 00000

Frm 00080

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

resident organizations: Provided further, That
the Secretary shall consult with the Secretaries of Education, Labor, Transportation,
Health and Human Services, Agriculture,
and Commerce, the Attorney General, and
the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency to coordinate and leverage other appropriate Federal resources: Provided further, That not more than $10,000,000
of the amounts made available under this
heading may be provided as grants to undertake comprehensive local planning with
input from residents and the community:
Provided further, That none of the funds made
available under this heading may be obligated for main street housing grants under
section 24(n) of the Act (42 U.S.C. 1437v(n)):
Provided further, That unobligated balances,
including
recaptures,
remaining
from
amounts made available under the heading
‘‘Revitalization of Severely Distressed Public Housing (HOPE VI)’’ in fiscal year 2011
and prior fiscal years may be used for purposes under this heading, notwithstanding
the purposes for which such amounts were
appropriated: Provided further, That the Secretary shall make grant awards not later
than 1 year after the date of enactment of
this Act in such amounts that the Secretary
determines: Provided further, That notwithstanding section 24(o) of the Act (42 U.S.C.
1437v(o)), the Secretary may, until September 30, 2026, obligate any available unobligated balances made available under this
heading in this or any prior Act.
SELF-SUFFICIENCY PROGRAMS

For activities and assistance related to
self-sufficiency programs, to remain available until September 30, 2029, $206,400,000:
Provided, That of the sums appropriated
under this heading—
(1) $156,400,000 shall be available for the
family self-sufficiency program to support
family self-sufficiency coordinators under
section 23 of the United States Housing Act
of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437u), to promote the development of local strategies to coordinate
the use of assistance under sections 8 and 9
of such Act with public and private resources, and enable eligible families to
achieve economic independence and self-sufficiency: Provided, That the Secretary may
use recaptured amounts made available
under this paragraph in prior Acts to provide
bonus awards to programs that are assigned
a ranking of performance category 1 based
on their publicly available family self-sufficiency achievement metrics (FAM) scores;
(2) $40,000,000 shall be available for the resident opportunity and self-sufficiency program to provide for supportive services, service coordinators, and congregate services as
authorized by section 34 of the United States
Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437z–6) and
the Native American Housing Assistance and
Self-Determination Act of 1996 (25 U.S.C. 4101
et seq.): Provided, That amounts made available under this paragraph may be used to
renew resident opportunity and self-sufficiency program grants to allow the public
housing agency, or a new owner, to continue
to serve (or restart service to) residents of a
project with assistance converted from public housing to project-based rental assistance
under section 8 of the United States Housing
Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f) or assistance
under section 8(o)(13) of such Act under the
heading ‘‘Rental Assistance Demonstration’’
in the Department of Housing and Urban Development Appropriations Act, 2012 (Public
Law 112–55), as amended (42 U.S.C. 1437f
note); and
(3) $10,000,000 shall be available for a jobsplus initiative, modeled after the jobs-plus
demonstration: Provided, That funding provided under this paragraph shall be available

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

for competitive grants to partnerships between public housing agencies, local workforce investment boards established under
section 107 of the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act of 2014 (29 U.S.C. 3122), and
other agencies and organizations that provide support to help public housing residents
obtain employment and increase earnings:
Provided further, That applicants must demonstrate the ability to provide services to
residents, partner with workforce investment boards, and leverage service dollars:
Provided further, That the Secretary may
allow public housing agencies to request exemptions from rent and income limitation
requirements under sections 3 and 6 of the
United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C.
1437a, 1437d), as necessary to implement the
jobs-plus program, on such terms and conditions as the Secretary may approve upon a
finding by the Secretary that any such waivers or alternative requirements are necessary for the effective implementation of
the jobs-plus initiative as a voluntary program for residents: Provided further, That the
Secretary shall publish by notice in the Federal Register any waivers or alternative requirements pursuant to the preceding proviso no later than 10 days before the effective
date of such notice.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

NATIVE AMERICAN PROGRAMS

For activities and assistance authorized
under title I of the Native American Housing
Assistance and Self-Determination Act of
1996 (in this heading ‘‘NAHASDA’’) (25 U.S.C.
4111 et seq.), title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C.
5301 et seq.) with respect to Indian tribes,
and for related activities and assistance,
$1,354,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2030: Provided, That of the sums
appropriated under this heading—
(1) $1,111,000,000 shall be available for the
Native American housing block grants program, as authorized under title I of
NAHASDA: Provided, That, notwithstanding
NAHASDA, to determine the amount of the
allocation under title I of such Act for each
Indian tribe, the Secretary shall apply the
formula under section 302 of such Act with
the need component based on single-race
census data and with the need component
based on multi-race census data, and the
amount of the allocation for each Indian
tribe shall be the greater of the two resulting allocation amounts: Provided further,
That the Secretary shall notify grantees of
their formula allocation not later than 60
days after the date of enactment of this Act;
(2) $125,000,000 shall be available for competitive grants under the Native American
housing block grants program, as authorized
under title I of NAHASDA: Provided, That
the Secretary shall obligate such amount for
competitive grants to eligible recipients authorized under NAHASDA that apply for
funds: Provided further, That in awarding
amounts made available in this paragraph,
the Secretary shall consider need and administrative capacity, and shall give priority to
projects that will spur construction and rehabilitation of housing: Provided further,
That any amounts transferred for the necessary costs of administering and overseeing
the obligation and expenditure of such additional amounts in prior Acts may also be
used for the necessary costs of administering
and overseeing such additional amount;
(3) $10,000,000 shall be available for noncompetitive grants to recipients that received a Tribal HUD-Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing grant in prior years, to be
available under the same terms and conditions as funds specified under paragraph (5)
under the heading ‘‘Public and Indian Housing–Tenant-Based Rental Assistance’’ in
Public Law 118–42: Provided, That the Sec-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1255

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

retary may reallocate, as determined by the
Secretary, amounts returned or recaptured
from awards under the Tribal HUD–VASH
program under prior Acts to existing recipients under the Tribal HUD–VASH program;
(4) $1,000,000 shall be available for the cost
of guaranteed notes and other obligations, as
authorized by title VI of NAHASDA: Provided, That such costs, including the cost of
modifying such notes and other obligations,
shall be as defined in section 502 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 661a):
Provided further, That amounts made available in this and prior Acts for the cost of
such guaranteed notes and other obligations
that are unobligated, including recaptures
and carryover, may be available to subsidize
the total principal amount of any notes and
other obligations, any part of which is to be
guaranteed, not to exceed $60,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027;
(5) $100,000,000 shall be available for grants
to Indian tribes for carrying out the Indian
community development block grant program under title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, notwithstanding section 106(a)(1) of such Act, of
which, notwithstanding any other provision
of law (including section 203 of this Act), not
more than $10,000,000 may be used for emergencies that constitute imminent threats to
health and safety: Provided, That not to exceed 20 percent of any grant made with
amounts made available in this paragraph
shall be expended for planning and management development and administration; and
(6) $7,000,000, in addition to amounts otherwise available for such purpose, shall be
available for providing training and technical assistance to Indian tribes, Indian
housing authorities, and tribally designated
housing entities, to support the inspection of
Indian housing units, for contract expertise,
and for training and technical assistance related to amounts made available under this
heading and other headings in this Act for
the needs of Native American families and
Indian country: Provided, That of the
amounts made available in this paragraph,
not less than $2,000,000 shall be for a national
organization as authorized under section 703
of NAHASDA (25 U.S.C. 4212): Provided further, That amounts made available in this
paragraph may be used, contracted, or competed as determined by the Secretary: Provided further, That notwithstanding chapter
63 of title 31, United States Code (commonly
known as the Federal Grant and Cooperative
Agreements Act of 1977), the amounts made
available in this paragraph may be used by
the Secretary to enter into cooperative
agreements with public and private organizations, agencies, institutions, and other technical assistance providers to support the administration of negotiated rulemaking under
section 106 of NAHASDA (25 U.S.C. 4116), the
administration of the allocation formula
under section 302 of NAHASDA (25 U.S.C.
4152), and the administration of performance
tracking and reporting under section 407 of
NAHASDA (25 U.S.C. 4167).
INDIAN HOUSING LOAN GUARANTEE FUND
PROGRAM ACCOUNT

For the cost of guaranteed loans, as authorized by section 184 of the Housing and
Community Development Act of 1992 (12
U.S.C. 1715z–13a), $1,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That such
costs, including the cost of modifying such
loans, shall be as defined in section 502 of the
Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C.
661a): Provided further, That an additional
$400,000, to remain available until expended,
shall be available for administrative contract expenses including management processes to carry out the loan guarantee program: Provided further, That amounts made

PO 00000

Frm 00081

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

available in this and prior Acts for the cost
of guaranteed loans, as authorized by section
184 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 (12 U.S.C. 1715z–13a), that
are unobligated, including recaptures and
carryover, may be available to subsidize
total loan principal, any part of which is to
be guaranteed, not to exceed $1,800,000,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2027.
NATIVE HAWAIIAN HOUSING BLOCK GRANT

For the Native Hawaiian housing block
grant program, as authorized under title VIII
of the Native American Housing Assistance
and Self-Determination Act of 1996 (25 U.S.C.
4221 et seq.), $22,300,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2030: Provided, That notwithstanding section 812(b) of such Act, the
Department of Hawaiian Home Lands may
not invest grant amounts made available
under this heading in investment securities
and other obligations: Provided further, That
amounts made available under this heading
in this and prior fiscal years may be used to
provide rental assistance to eligible Native
Hawaiian families both on and off the Hawaiian Home Lands, notwithstanding any other
provision of law: Provided further, That up to
$1,000,000 of the amounts made available
under this heading may be for training and
technical assistance related to amounts
made available under this heading and other
headings in this Act for the needs of Native
Hawaiians and the Department of Hawaiian
Home Lands.
NATIVE HAWAIIAN HOUSING LOAN GUARANTEE
FUND PROGRAM ACCOUNT

New commitments to guarantee loans, as
authorized by section 184A of the Housing
and Community Development Act of 1992 (12
U.S.C. 1715z–13b), any part of which is to be
guaranteed, shall not exceed $28,000,000 in
total loan principal, to remain available
until September 30, 2027: Provided, That the
Secretary may enter into commitments to
guarantee loans used for refinancing.
COMMUNITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR PERSONS WITH
AIDS

For carrying out the housing opportunities
for persons with AIDS program, as authorized by the AIDS Housing Opportunity Act
(42 U.S.C. 12901 et seq.), $529,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2029: Provided, That the Secretary shall renew or replace all expiring contracts for permanent
supportive housing that initially were funded under section 854(c)(5) of such Act from
funds made available under this heading in
fiscal year 2010 and prior fiscal years that
meet all program requirements before
awarding funds for new contracts under such
section: Provided further, That the process for
submitting amendments and approving replacement contracts shall be established by
the Secretary in a notice: Provided further,
That the Department shall notify grantees of
their formula allocation within 60 days of enactment of this Act.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FUND

For assistance to States and units of general local government, and other entities, for
economic and community development activities, and other purposes, $6,995,244,120, to
remain available until September 30, 2029:
Provided, That of the sums appropriated
under this heading—
(1) $3,300,000,000 shall be available for carrying out the community development block
grant program under title I of the Housing
and Community Development Act of 1974, as
amended (42 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.) (in this heading ‘‘the Act’’): Provided, That not to exceed
20 percent of any grant made with funds
made available under this paragraph shall be

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1256

expended for planning and management development and administration: Provided further, That a metropolitan city, urban county, unit of general local government, or insular area that directly or indirectly receives
funds under this paragraph may not sell,
trade, or otherwise transfer all or any portion of such funds to another such entity in
exchange for any other funds, credits, or
non-Federal considerations, but shall use
such funds for activities eligible under title
I of the Act: Provided further, That notwithstanding section 105(e)(1) of the Act, no funds
made available under this paragraph may be
provided to a for-profit entity for an economic development project under section
105(a)(17) unless such project has been evaluated and selected in accordance with guidelines required under subsection (e)(2) of section 105;
(2) $50,000,000 shall be available for the Secretary to award grants on a competitive
basis to State and local governments, metropolitan planning organizations, and multijurisdictional entities for additional activities under title I of the Act for the identification and removal of barriers to affordable
housing production and preservation, including new housing construction: Provided, That
eligible uses of such grants include activities
to further develop, evaluate, and implement
housing policy plans, improve housing strategies, and facilitate affordable housing production and preservation: Provided further,
That the Secretary shall select applicants
that (A) have enacted or implemented (or
caused another entity to enact or implement) less restrictive zoning, land use, or
permitting laws and regulations, that are
reasonably expected to preserve or produce
new housing units; and (B) can demonstrate
an acute need for housing affordable to
households with incomes below 100 percent of
the area median income: Provided further,
That grantees shall report to the Secretary
on their activities and housing supply outcomes: Provided further, That the Secretary
shall analyze observable housing production,
preservation, and cost trends in the participating jurisdictions or geographic areas: Provided further, That the Secretary shall annually report to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations, and make publicly
available, a summary of the information collected in the preceding two provisos: Provided further, That funds allocated for such
grants shall not adversely affect the amount
of any formula assistance received by a jurisdiction under paragraph (1) of this heading:
Provided further, That in administering such
amounts the Secretary may waive or specify
alternative requirements for any provision of
title I of the Act except for requirements related to fair housing, nondiscrimination,
labor standards, the environment, and requirements that activities benefit persons of
low- and moderate-income, upon a finding
that any such waivers or alternative requirements are necessary to expedite or facilitate
the use of such amounts: Provided further,
That the Secretary shall issue a notice of
funding opportunity not later than 120 days
after the date of enactment of this Act;
(3) $30,000,000 shall be available for activities authorized under section 8071 of the
SUPPORT for Patients and Communities
Act (Public Law 115–271): Provided, That
funds allocated pursuant to this paragraph
shall not adversely affect the amount of any
formula assistance received by a State under
paragraph (1) of this heading: Provided further, That the Secretary shall allocate the
funds for such activities based on the notice
establishing the funding formula published
in 84 FR 16027 (April 17, 2019) except that the
formula shall use age-adjusted rates of drug
overdose deaths for 2023 based on data from

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; and
(4) $3,615,244,120 shall be available for
grants for the economic development initiative (EDI) for the purposes, and in amounts,
specified for Community Project Funding/
Congressionally Directed Spending in the
table entitled ‘‘Community Project Funding/
Congressionally Directed Spending’’ included
for this division in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter
preceding division A of this consolidated
Act): Provided, That amounts made available
under this paragraph for such purposes shall
not diminish or prejudice any application or
geographic region for other discretionary
grant or loan awards made by the Department of Housing and Urban Development:
Provided further, That eligible expenses of
such grants in this and prior Acts may include administrative, planning, operations
and maintenance, and other costs: Provided
further, That such grants for the EDI shall be
available for reimbursement of otherwise eligible expenses incurred on or after the date
of enactment of this Act and prior to the
date of grant execution: Provided further,
That none of the amounts made available
under this paragraph for grants for the EDI
shall be used for reimbursement of expenses
incurred prior to the date of enactment of
this Act:
Provided further, That for amounts made
available under paragraphs (1) and (3), the
Secretary shall notify grantees of their formula allocation within 60 days of enactment
of this Act.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT LOAN GUARANTEES
PROGRAM ACCOUNT

Subject to section 502 of the Congressional
Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 661a), during fiscal year 2026, commitments to guarantee
loans under section 108 of the Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974 (42
U.S.C. 5308), any part of which is guaranteed,
shall not exceed a total principal amount of
$300,000,000, notwithstanding any aggregate
limitation on outstanding obligations guaranteed in subsection (k) of such section 108:
Provided, That the Secretary shall collect
fees from borrowers, notwithstanding subsection (m) of such section 108, to result in a
credit subsidy cost of zero for guaranteeing
such loans, and any such fees shall be collected in accordance with section 502(7) of
the Congressional Budget Act of 1974: Provided further, That such commitment authority funded by fees may be used to guarantee,
or make commitments to guarantee, notes
or other obligations issued by any State on
behalf of non-entitlement communities in
the State in accordance with the requirements of such section 108: Provided further,
That any State receiving such a guarantee
or commitment under the preceding proviso
shall distribute all funds subject to such
guarantee to the units of general local government in non-entitlement areas that received the commitment.
HOME INVESTMENT PARTNERSHIPS PROGRAM

For the HOME investment partnerships
program, as authorized under title II of the
Cranston-Gonzalez
National
Affordable
Housing Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 12721 et
seq.), $1,250,000,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2029: Provided, That the
threshold reduction requirements in sections
216(10) and 217(b)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C.
12746(10), 12747(b)(4)) shall not apply to the
amounts made available under this heading:
Provided further, That notwithstanding section 231(b) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 12771(b)), all
unobligated
balances
remaining
from
amounts recaptured pursuant to such section
that remain available until expended shall
be combined with amounts made available
under this heading and allocated in accord-

PO 00000

Frm 00082

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ance with the formula under section
217(b)(1)(A)
of
such
Act
(42
U.S.C.
12747(b)(1)(A)): Provided further, That the Department shall notify grantees of their formula allocations within 60 days after enactment of this Act: Provided further, That section 218(g) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 12748(g))
shall not apply with respect to the right of a
jurisdiction to draw funds from its HOME Investment Trust Fund that otherwise expired
or would expire in any calendar year from
2020 through 2028 under that section: Provided
further, That section 231(b) of such Act (42
U.S.C. 12771(b)) shall not apply to any
uninvested funds that otherwise were deducted or would be deducted from the line of
credit in the participating jurisdiction’s
HOME Investment Trust Fund in any calendar year from 2020 through 2028 under that
section.
SELF-HELP AND ASSISTED HOMEOWNERSHIP
OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM

For the self-help and assisted homeownership opportunity program, as authorized
under section 11 of the Housing Opportunity
Program Extension Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C.
12805 note), and for related activities and assistance, $65,000,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2028: Provided, That of
the sums appropriated under this heading—
(1) $12,000,000 shall be available for the selfhelp homeownership opportunity program as
authorized under such section 11;
(2) $46,000,000 shall be available for the second, third, and fourth capacity building entities specified in section 4(a) of the HUD Demonstration Act of 1993 (III Stat 201; 42 U.S.C.
9816 note), of which not less than $5,000,000
shall be for rural capacity building activities; and
(3) $7,000,000 shall be available for capacity
building by national rural housing organizations having experience assessing national
rural conditions and providing financing,
training, technical assistance, information,
and research to local nonprofit organizations, local governments, and Indian tribes
serving high need rural communities.
HOMELESS ASSISTANCE GRANTS

For assistance under title IV of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42
U.S.C. 11360 et seq.), and for related activities and assistance, $4,417,000,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2028: Provided,
That of the sums appropriated under this
heading—
(1) $290,000,000 shall be available for the
emergency solutions grants program authorized under subtitle B of such title IV (42
U.S.C. 11371 et seq.): Provided, That the Department shall notify grantees of their formula allocation from amounts allocated
(which may represent initial or final
amounts allocated) for the emergency solutions grant program not later than 60 days
after enactment of this Act;
(2) $4,010,000,000 shall be available for the
continuum of care program authorized under
subtitle C of such title IV (42 U.S.C. 11381 et
seq.) and the rural housing stability assistance programs authorized under subtitle D of
such title IV (42 U.S.C. 11408): Provided, That
the Secretary shall prioritize funding under
the continuum of care program to continuums of care that have demonstrated a capacity to reallocate funding from lower performing projects to higher performing
projects: Provided further, That the Secretary
shall make reasonable adjustments to renewal amounts to enable renewal projects to
operate at substantially the same levels, including cost-of-living adjustments for supportive services from the prior grant: Provided further, That in allocating and awarding amounts made available under this paragraph, the Secretary shall select projects totaling not less than 60 percent of the annual

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

renewal demand for each collaborative applicant based on rankings determined by the
local continuum of care and consistent with
42 U.S.C. 11381 et seq.: Provided further, That
the Secretary may establish by notice an alternative maximum amount for administrative costs related to the requirements described in sections 402(f)(1) and 402(f)(2) of
subtitle A of such title IV of no more than 5
percent or $50,000, whichever is greater, notwithstanding the 3 percent limitation in section 423(a)(10) of such subtitle C: Provided
further, That of the amounts made available
for the continuum of care program under
this paragraph, $52,000,000 shall be for grants
for new rapid re-housing projects and supportive service projects providing coordinated entry, and for eligible activities that
the Secretary determines to be critical in
order to assist survivors of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or
stalking, except that the Secretary may
make additional grants for such projects and
purposes from amounts made available for
such continuum of care program: Provided
further, That amounts made available for the
continuum of care program under this paragraph and any remaining unobligated balances under this heading in prior Acts may
be used to competitively or non-competitively renew or replace grants for youth
homelessness demonstration projects under
the continuum of care program, notwithstanding any conflict with the requirements
of the continuum of care program: Provided
further, That any continuum of care, in consultation with their youth action board, that
determines it no longer has an identified
need for funds to renew a youth homelessness demonstration project shall notify the
Secretary, and the Secretary shall recapture
such assistance from the continuum of care
and competitively award it to any other continuum of care with the amounts provided
under this heading under paragraph (4): Provided further, That the Secretary shall issue
the notice of funding opportunity for the
amounts made available in this paragraph
not later than June 1, 2026 and shall award
such amounts not later than December 1,
2026;
(3) $10,000,000 shall be available for the national homeless data analysis project: Provided, That notwithstanding the provisions
of the Federal Grant and Cooperative Agreements Act of 1977 (31 U.S.C. 6301–6308), the
amounts made available under this paragraph and any remaining unobligated balances under this heading for such purposes in
prior Acts may be used by the Secretary to
enter into cooperative agreements with such
entities as may be determined by the Secretary, including public and private organizations, agencies, and institutions; and
(4) $107,000,000 shall be available to implement projects to demonstrate how a comprehensive approach to serving homeless
youth, age 24 and under, in up to 25 communities with a priority for communities with
substantial rural populations in up to eight
locations, can dramatically reduce youth
homelessness: Provided, That of the amount
made available under this paragraph, up to
$25,000,000 may be for youth homelessness
system improvement grants to support communities, including but not limited to the
communities assisted under the matter preceding this proviso, in establishing and implementing an evidence-based response system for youth homelessness, or for improving their existing system, including through
the establishment of local youth advisory
boards, collaboration with youth with lived
experience of homelessness in project design
and implementation, improving data collection, management, utilization and evaluation, cross-system partnerships with juvenile
justice, child welfare, and education sys-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1257

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

tems: Provided further, That of the amount
made available under this paragraph, up to
$10,000,000 shall be to provide technical assistance to communities, including but not
limited to the communities assisted in the
preceding proviso and the matter preceding
such proviso, on improving system responses
to youth homelessness, and collection, analysis, use, and reporting of data and performance measures under the comprehensive approaches to serve homeless youth, in addition to and in coordination with other technical assistance funds provided under this
title: Provided further, That the Secretary
may use up to 10 percent of the amount made
available under the preceding proviso to
build the capacity of current technical assistance providers or to train new technical
assistance providers with verifiable prior experience with systems and programs for
youth experiencing homelessness:
Provided further, That youth aged 24 and
under seeking assistance under this heading
shall not be required to provide third party
documentation to establish their eligibility
under subsection (a) or (b) of section 103 of
the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance
Act (42 U.S.C. 11302) to receive services: Provided further, That unaccompanied youth
aged 24 and under or families headed by
youth aged 24 and under who are living in
unsafe situations may be served by youthserving providers funded under this heading:
Provided further, That recipients of funds provided under this heading in this Act or any
prior Act may establish preferences for elderly individuals or families (except for programs provided to serve homeless youth), or
disabled individuals or families as defined by
section 401(10) of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11360(10)), when
implementing the programs: Provided further,
That persons eligible under section 103(a)(5)
of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance
Act may be served by any project funded
under this heading to provide both transitional housing and rapid re-housing: Provided
further, That for all matching funds requirements applicable to funds made available
under this heading for this fiscal year and
prior fiscal years, a grantee may use (or
could have used) as a source of match funds
other funds administered by the Secretary
and other Federal agencies unless there is
(or was) a specific statutory prohibition on
any such use of any such funds: Provided further, That none of the funds made available
under this heading shall be available to provide funding for new projects, except for
projects created through reallocation, unless
the Secretary determines that the continuum of care has demonstrated that
projects are evaluated and ranked based on
the degree to which they improve the continuum of care’s system performance: Provided further, That any unobligated amounts
remaining from funds made available under
this heading in fiscal year 2012 and prior
years for project-based rental assistance for
rehabilitation projects with 10-year grant
terms may be used for purposes under this
heading, notwithstanding the purposes for
which such funds were appropriated: Provided
further, That unobligated balances, including
recaptures and carryover, remaining from
funds transferred to or appropriated under
this heading in fiscal year 2019 or prior
years, except for rental assistance amounts
that were recaptured and made available
until expended, shall be available for the
current purposes authorized under this heading in addition to the purposes for which
such funds originally were appropriated.
HOUSING PROGRAMS
PROJECT-BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE
For activities and assistance for the provision of project-based subsidy contracts under

PO 00000

Frm 00083

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42
U.S.C. 1437 et seq.) (‘‘the Act’’), not otherwise provided for, $18,143,000,000, to remain
available until expended, shall be available
on October 1, 2025 (in addition to the
$400,000,000 previously appropriated under
this heading that became available October
1, 2025), and $400,000,000, to remain available
until expended, shall be available on October
1, 2026: Provided, That the amounts made
available under this heading shall be available for expiring or terminating section 8
project-based subsidy contracts (including
section 8 moderate rehabilitation contracts),
for amendments to section 8 project-based
subsidy contracts (including section 8 moderate rehabilitation contracts), for contracts
entered into pursuant to section 441 of the
McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act
(42 U.S.C. 11401), for renewal of section 8 contracts for units in projects that are subject
to approved plans of action under the Emergency Low Income Housing Preservation Act
of 1987 or the Low-Income Housing Preservation and Resident Homeownership Act of
1990, and for administrative and other expenses associated with project-based activities and assistance funded under this heading: Provided further, That of the total
amounts provided under this heading, not to
exceed $509,000,000 shall be available for performance-based contract administrators for
section 8 project-based assistance, for carrying out 42 U.S.C. 1437(f): Provided further,
That the Secretary may also use such
amounts in the preceding proviso for performance-based contract administrators for
the administration of: interest reduction
payments pursuant to section 236(a) of the
National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z–1(a));
rent supplement payments pursuant to section 101 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965 (12 U.S.C. 1701s); section
236(f)(2) rental assistance payments (12
U.S.C. 1715z–1(f)(2)); project rental assistance
contracts for the elderly under section
202(c)(2) of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 U.S.C.
1701q); project rental assistance contracts for
supportive housing for persons with disabilities under section 811(d)(2) of the CranstonGonzalez National Affordable Housing Act
(42 U.S.C. 8013(d)(2)); project assistance contracts pursuant to section 202(h) of the Housing Act of 1959 (Public Law 86–372; 73 Stat.
667); and loans under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 (Public Law 86–372; 73 Stat.
667): Provided further, That amounts recaptured under this heading, the heading ‘‘Annual Contributions for Assisted Housing’’, or
the heading ‘‘Housing Certificate Fund’’,
may be used for renewals of or amendments
to section 8 project-based contracts or for
performance-based contract administrators,
notwithstanding the purposes for which such
amounts were appropriated: Provided further,
That, notwithstanding any other provision
of law, upon the request of the Secretary,
project funds that are held in residual receipts accounts for any project subject to a
section 8 project-based housing assistance
payments contract that authorizes the Department or a housing finance agency to require that surplus project funds be deposited
in an interest-bearing residual receipts account and that are in excess of an amount to
be determined by the Secretary, shall be remitted to the Department and deposited in
this account, to be available until expended:
Provided further, That amounts deposited
pursuant to the preceding proviso shall be
available in addition to the amount otherwise provided by this heading for uses authorized under this heading.
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY

For capital advances, including amendments to capital advance contracts, for housing for the elderly, as authorized by section

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1258

202 of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 U.S.C.
1701q), for project rental assistance for the
elderly under section 202(c)(2) of such Act,
including amendments to contracts for such
assistance and renewal of expiring contracts
for such assistance for up to a 5-year term,
for senior preservation rental assistance contracts, including renewals, as authorized by
section 811(e) of the American Homeownership and Economic Opportunity Act of 2000
(12 U.S.C. 1701q note), for supportive services
associated with the housing, and for administrative and other expenses associated with
assistance under this heading, $1,031,000,000
to remain available until September 30, 2029:
Provided, That of the amount made available
under this heading, up to $122,000,000 shall be
for service coordinators and the continuation of existing congregate service grants
for residents of assisted housing projects:
Provided further, That any funding for existing service coordinators under the preceding
proviso shall be provided within 120 days of
enactment of this Act: Provided further, That
the Secretary may enter into 2-year agreements as appropriate with such funding that
are subject to the availability of annual appropriations: Provided further, That the Secretary may waive the provisions of section
202 governing the terms and conditions of
project rental assistance, except that the initial contract term for such assistance shall
not exceed 5 years in duration: Provided further, That upon request of the Secretary,
project funds that are held in residual receipts accounts for any project subject to a
section 202 project rental assistance contract, and that upon termination of such
contract are in excess of an amount to be determined by the Secretary, shall be remitted
to the Department and deposited in this account, to remain available until September
30, 2029: Provided further, That amounts deposited in this account pursuant to the preceding proviso shall be available, in addition
to the amounts otherwise provided by this
heading, for the purposes authorized under
this heading: Provided further, That unobligated balances, including recaptures and carryover, remaining from funds transferred to
or appropriated under this heading shall be
available for the current purposes authorized
under this heading in addition to the purposes for which such funds originally were
appropriated: Provided further, That of the
total amount made available under this
heading, up to $4,000,000 shall be used by the
Secretary to support preservation transactions of housing for the elderly originally
developed with a capital advance and assisted by a project rental assistance contract
under the provisions of section 202(c) of the
Housing Act of 1959.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

For capital advances, including amendments to capital advance contracts, for supportive housing for persons with disabilities,
as authorized by section 811 of the CranstonGonzalez National Affordable Housing Act
(42 U.S.C. 8013), for project rental assistance
for supportive housing for persons with disabilities under section 811(d)(2) of such Act,
for project assistance contracts pursuant to
subsection (h) of section 202 of the Housing
Act of 1959, as added by section 205(a) of the
Housing
and
Community
Development
Amendments of 1978 (Public Law 95–557; 92
Stat. 2090), including amendments to contracts for such assistance and renewal of expiring contracts for such assistance for up to
a 5-year term, for project rental assistance
to State housing finance agencies and other
appropriate entities as authorized under section 811(b)(3) of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, for supportive
services associated with the housing for persons with disabilities as authorized by sec-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

tion 811(b)(1) of such Act, and for administrative and other expenses associated with assistance
funded
under
this
heading,
$287,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2029: Provided, That, upon the request of the Secretary, project funds that are
held in residual receipts accounts for any
project subject to a section 811 project rental
assistance contract, and that upon termination of such contract are in excess of an
amount to be determined by the Secretary,
shall be remitted to the Department and deposited in this account, to remain available
until September 30, 2029: Provided further,
That amounts deposited in this account pursuant to the preceding proviso shall be available in addition to the amounts otherwise
provided by this heading for the purposes authorized under this heading: Provided further,
That unobligated balances, including recaptures and carryover, remaining from funds
transferred to or appropriated under this
heading shall be used for the current purposes authorized under this heading in addition to the purposes for which such funds
originally were appropriated.
HOUSING COUNSELING ASSISTANCE

For contracts, grants, and other assistance
excluding loans, as authorized under section
106 of the Housing and Urban Development
Act of 1968, as amended, $57,500,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2027, including
up to $4,500,000 for administrative contract
services: Provided, That funds shall be used
for providing counseling and advice to tenants and homeowners, both current and prospective, with respect to property maintenance, financial management or literacy,
and such other matters as may be appropriate to assist them in improving their
housing conditions, meeting their financial
needs, and fulfilling the responsibilities of
tenancy or homeownership; for program administration; and for housing counselor
training: Provided further, That for purposes
of awarding grants from amounts provided
under this heading, the Secretary may enter
into multiyear agreements, as appropriate,
subject to the availability of annual appropriations.
PAYMENT TO MANUFACTURED HOUSING FEES
TRUST FUND

For necessary expenses as authorized by
the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974
(42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.), up to $14,000,000, to remain available until expended, of which
$14,000,000 shall be derived from the Manufactured Housing Fees Trust Fund (established
under section 620(e) of such Act (42 U.S.C.
5419(e)): Provided, That not to exceed the
total amount appropriated under this heading shall be available from the general fund
of the Treasury to the extent necessary to
incur obligations and make expenditures
pending the receipt of collections to the
Fund pursuant to section 620 of such Act:
Provided further, That the amount made
available under this heading from the general fund shall be reduced as such collections
are received during fiscal year 2026 so as to
result in a final fiscal year 2026 appropriation from the general fund estimated at zero,
and fees pursuant to such section 620 shall be
modified as necessary to ensure such a final
fiscal year 2026 appropriation: Provided further, That for the dispute resolution and installation programs, the Secretary may assess and collect fees from any program participant: Provided further, That such collections shall be deposited into the Trust Fund,
and the Secretary, as provided herein, may
use such collections, as well as fees collected
under section 620 of such Act, for necessary
expenses of such Act: Provided further, That,
notwithstanding the requirements of section
620 of such Act, the Secretary may carry out

PO 00000

Frm 00084

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

responsibilities of the Secretary under such
Act through the use of approved service providers that are paid directly by the recipients of their services.
FEDERAL HOUSING ADMINISTRATION
MUTUAL MORTGAGE INSURANCE PROGRAM
ACCOUNT

New commitments to guarantee single
family loans insured under the Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund shall not exceed
$400,000,000,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2027: Provided, That during fiscal year 2026, obligations to make direct
loans to carry out the purposes of section
204(g) of the National Housing Act, as
amended, shall not exceed $1,000,000: Provided
further, That the foregoing amount in the
preceding proviso shall be for loans to nonprofit and governmental entities in connection with sales of single family real properties owned by the Secretary and formerly
insured under the Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund: Provided further, That for administrative contract expenses of the Federal
Housing Administration, $160,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided further, That to the extent guaranteed
loan commitments exceed $200,000,000,000 on
or before April 1, 2026, an additional $1,400 for
administrative contract expenses shall be
available for each $1,000,000 in additional
guaranteed loan commitments (including a
pro rata amount for any amount below
$1,000,000), but in no case shall funds made
available by this proviso exceed $30,000,000:
Provided further, That notwithstanding the
limitation in the first sentence of section
255(g) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C.
1715z–20(g)), during fiscal year 2026 the Secretary may insure and enter into new commitments to insure mortgages under section
255 of the National Housing Act only to the
extent that the net credit subsidy cost for
such insurance does not exceed zero.
GENERAL AND SPECIAL RISK PROGRAM ACCOUNT

New commitments to guarantee loans insured under the General and Special Risk Insurance Funds, as authorized by sections 238
and 519 of the National Housing Act (12
U.S.C. 1715z–3 and 1735c), shall not exceed
$35,000,000,000 in total loan principal, any
part of which is to be guaranteed, to remain
available until September 30, 2027: Provided,
That during fiscal year 2026, gross obligations for the principal amount of direct
loans, as authorized by sections 204(g), 207(l),
238, and 519(a) of the National Housing Act,
shall not exceed $1,000,000, which shall be for
loans to nonprofit and governmental entities
in connection with the sale of single family
real properties owned by the Secretary and
formerly insured under such Act.
GOVERNMENT NATIONAL MORTGAGE
ASSOCIATION
GUARANTEES OF MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES
LOAN GUARANTEE PROGRAM ACCOUNT

New commitments to issue guarantees to
carry out the purposes of section 306 of the
National Housing Act, as amended (12 U.S.C.
1721(g)), shall not exceed $550,000,000,000, to
remain available until September 30, 2027:
Provided, That $56,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, shall be for
necessary salaries and expenses of the Government National Mortgage Association:
Provided further, That to the extent that
guaranteed
loan
commitments
exceed
$155,000,000,000 on or before April 1, 2026, an
additional $100 for necessary salaries and expenses shall be available until expended for
each $1,000,000 in additional guaranteed loan
commitments (including a pro rata amount
for any amount below $1,000,000), but in no
case shall funds made available by this proviso exceed $3,000,000: Provided further, That
receipts from Commitment and Multiclass

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

fees collected pursuant to title III of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1716 et seq.)
shall be credited as offsetting collections to
this account.
POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND RESEARCH
RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

For contracts, grants, and necessary expenses of programs of research and studies
relating to housing and urban problems, not
otherwise provided for, as authorized by title
V of the Housing and Urban Development
Act of 1970 (12 U.S.C. 1701z–1 et seq.), including carrying out the functions of the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
under section 1(a)(1)(i) of Reorganization
Plan No. 2 of 1968, and for technical assistance, $122,500,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2027: Provided, That of the
amounts made available under this heading,
$40,000,000 shall be for technical assistance,
of which $5,000,000 shall be for the distressed
cities technical assistance program: Provided
further, That with respect to amounts made
available under this heading, notwithstanding section 203 of this title, the Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with philanthropic entities, other
Federal agencies, State or local governments
and their agencies, Indian tribes, tribally
designated housing entities, or colleges or
universities for research projects: Provided
further, That with respect to the preceding
proviso, such partners to the cooperative
agreements shall contribute at least a 50 percent match toward the cost of the project:
Provided further, That for non-competitive
agreements entered into in accordance with
the preceding two provisos, the Secretary
shall comply with section 2(b) of the Federal
Funding Accountability and Transparency
Act of 2006 (Public Law 109–282; 31 U.S.C.
note) in lieu of compliance with section
102(a)(4)(C) of the Department of Housing and
Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (42
U.S.C. 3545(a)(4)(C)) with respect to documentation of award decisions: Provided further, That of the total amounts provided
under this heading, $7,500,000 shall be for
competitive grants to nonprofit or governmental entities to provide legal assistance
(including assistance related to pretrial activities, trial activities, post-trial activities
and alternative dispute resolution) at no
cost to eligible low-income tenants at risk of
or subject to eviction: Provided further, That
in awarding grants under the preceding proviso, the Secretary shall give preference to
applicants that include a marketing strategy
for residents of areas with high rates of eviction, have experience providing no-cost legal
assistance to low-income individuals, and
have sufficient capacity to administer such
assistance: Provided further, That the Secretary shall ensure, to the extent practicable, that the proportion of eligible tenants living in rural areas who will receive
legal assistance with grant funds made available under this heading is not less than the
overall proportion of eligible tenants who
live in rural areas: Provided further, That the
Department shall maintain on its publicly
accessible website all completed research
funded under this heading by this or any
prior Act: Provided further, That the Department shall release and publish such research
without regard to the findings within 6
months of submission of the final report.
FAIR HOUSING AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
FAIR HOUSING ACTIVITIES

For contracts, grants, and other assistance, not otherwise provided for, as authorized by title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of
1968 (42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq.), section 561 of the
Housing and Community Development Act of
1987 (42 U.S.C. 3616a), and this heading,
$86,355,000, to remain available until Sep-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1259

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

tember 30, 2027: Provided, That of the sums
appropriated under this heading—
(1) $26,355,000 shall be for the fair housing
assistance program under such title VIII;
(2) $56,000,000 shall be for the fair housing
initiatives program under such section 561,
of which, not less than $10,400,000 shall be
available for education and outreach programs, not less than $3,700,000 shall be available for fair housing organization initiatives,
and not less than $40,500,000 shall be available for the private enforcement initiative,
except that if any program or initiative is
undersubscribed any remaining amounts
may be awarded to qualified applicants of
other programs or initiatives under this
paragraph: Provided, That the Secretary
shall issue each notice of funding opportunity for the fair housing initiatives program not later than 150 days after the date of
enactment of this Act;
(3) $1,000,000 may be for the Secretary for
the creation and promotion of translated
materials and other programs that support
the assistance of persons with limited
English proficiency in utilizing the services
provided by the Department of Housing and
Urban Development; and
(4) $3,000,000 shall be for the national fair
housing training academy: Provided, That
notwithstanding section 3302 of title 31,
United States Code, the Secretary may also
assess and collect fees to cover the costs of
such academy, and may use such funds to develop online courses and provide such training:
Provided further, That none of the funds made
available under this heading may be used to
lobby the executive or legislative branches
of the Federal Government in connection
with a specific contract, grant, or loan.
OFFICE OF LEAD HAZARD CONTROL AND
HEALTHY HOMES
LEAD HAZARD REDUCTION
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For the lead hazard reduction program, as
authorized by section 1011 of the Residential
Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of
1992 (42 U.S.C. 4852), the healthy homes initiative, pursuant to sections 501 and 502 of
the Housing and Urban Development Act of
1970 (12 U.S.C. 1701z–1 and 1701z–2), and for related activities and assistance, $295,600,000,
to remain available until September 30, 2028:
Provided, That the amounts made available
under this heading are provided as follows:
(1) $155,600,000 shall be for the award of
grants pursuant to such section 1011, of
which not less than $105,000,000 shall be provided to areas with the highest lead-based
paint abatement need;
(2) $140,000,000 shall be for the healthy
homes initiative, pursuant to sections 501
and 502 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1970, which shall include research, studies, testing, and demonstration
efforts, including education and outreach
concerning lead-based paint poisoning and
other housing-related diseases and hazards,
and mitigating housing-related health and
safety hazards in housing of low-income families: Provided, That up to $10,000,000 of
amounts made available under this paragraph shall be for a one-time national pilot
program to facilitate new financing mechanisms to address lead and other residential
environmental stressors in low-income communities: Provided further, That the Secretary shall issue the notice of funding of opportunity for the pilot program established
in the preceding proviso within 120 days of
enactment of this Act: Provided further, That
$30,000,000 of amounts made available under
this paragraph shall be for grants to experienced non-profit organizations, States, local
governments, or public housing agencies for
safety and functional home modification re-

PO 00000

Frm 00085

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

pairs and renovations to meet the needs of
low-income seniors to enable them to remain
in their primary residence, of which no less
than $10,000,000 shall be available to meet
such needs in communities with substantial
rural populations: Provided further, That for
funds made available for such grants in the
preceding proviso or under this heading or
the heading ‘‘Housing for the Elderly’’ in
prior Acts, all eligible activities, except
those that would alter the existing footprint
of a structure or improvement in a floodplain or a wetland, are exempt from environmental review and not subject to the Federal
laws and authorities cited in section 58.5 of
title 24, Code of Federal Regulations; and
(3) up to $2,000,000 in total of the amounts
made available under paragraph (2) may be
transferred to the heading ‘‘Research and
Technology’’ for the purposes of conducting
research and studies and for use in accordance with the provisos under that heading
for non-competitive agreements:
Provided further, That for purposes of environmental review, pursuant to the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C.
4321 et seq.) and other provisions of law that
further the purposes of such Act, a grant
under the healthy homes initiative, or the
lead technical studies program, or other
demonstrations or programs under this heading or under prior appropriations Acts for
such purposes under this heading, or under
the heading ‘‘Housing for the Elderly’’ under
prior Appropriations Acts, shall be considered to be funds for a special project for purposes of section 305(c) of the Multifamily
Housing Property Disposition Reform Act of
1994: Provided further, That each applicant for
a grant or cooperative agreement under this
heading shall certify adequate capacity that
is acceptable to the Secretary to carry out
the proposed use of funds pursuant to a notice of funding opportunity: Provided further,
That amounts made available under the fifth
paragraph under this heading by the FullYear Continuing Appropriations and Extensions Act, 2025 (Public Law 119–4) shall be
transferred to and merged with the amounts
provided under the fifth paragraph under the
heading ‘‘Public Housing Fund’’ in this Act
and prioritized for qualified projects where
the primary purpose is radon testing and
mitigation, except any transfer pursuant to
this provision shall retain its original availability: Provided further, That amounts made
available under this heading, in this or prior
appropriations Acts, still remaining available, may be used for any purpose under this
heading notwithstanding the purpose for
which such amounts were appropriated if a
program competition is undersubscribed and
there are other program competitions under
this heading that are oversubscribed.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
For necessary salaries and expenses of the
Office of Inspector General in carrying out
the Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended, $144,500,000: Provided, That the Inspector
General shall have independent authority
over all personnel and acquisition issues
within this office.
GENERAL PROVISIONS—DEPARTMENT OF
HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(INCLUDING RESCISSIONS)
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

SEC. 201. Fifty percent of the amounts of
budget authority, or in lieu thereof 50 percent of the cash amounts associated with
such budget authority, that are recaptured
from projects described in section 1012(a) of
the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Amendments Act of 1988 (42 U.S.C. 1437f
note) shall be rescinded or in the case of
cash, shall be remitted to the Treasury, and
such amounts of budget authority or cash recaptured and not rescinded or remitted to

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1260

the Treasury shall be used by State housing
finance agencies or local governments or
local housing agencies with projects approved by the Secretary of Housing and
Urban Development for which settlement occurred after January 1, 1992, in accordance
with such section. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, the Secretary may award up
to 15 percent of the budget authority or cash
recaptured and not rescinded or remitted to
the Treasury to provide project owners with
incentives to refinance their project at a
lower interest rate.
SEC. 202. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to investigate or
prosecute under the Fair Housing Act any
otherwise lawful activity engaged in by one
or more persons, including the filing or
maintaining of a nonfrivolous legal action,
that is engaged in solely for the purpose of
achieving or preventing action by a Government official or entity, or a court of competent jurisdiction.
SEC. 203. Except as explicitly provided in
law, any grant, cooperative agreement or
other assistance made pursuant to title II of
this Act shall be made on a competitive basis
and in accordance with section 102 of the Department of Housing and Urban Development
Reform Act of 1989 (42 U.S.C. 3545).
SEC. 204. Funds of the Department of Housing and Urban Development subject to the
Government Corporation Control Act or section 402 of the Housing Act of 1950 shall be
available, without regard to the limitations
on administrative expenses, for legal services on a contract or fee basis, and for utilizing and making payment for services and
facilities of the Federal National Mortgage
Association, Government National Mortgage
Association, Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation, Federal Financing Bank, Federal Reserve banks or any member thereof,
Federal Home Loan banks, and any insured
bank within the meaning of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, as amended
(12 U.S.C. 1811–1).
SEC. 205. Unless otherwise provided for in
this Act or through a reprogramming of
funds, no part of any appropriation for the
Department of Housing and Urban Development shall be available for any program,
project or activity in excess of amounts set
forth in the budget estimates submitted to
Congress.
SEC. 206. Corporations and agencies of the
Department of Housing and Urban Development which are subject to the Government
Corporation Control Act are hereby authorized to make such expenditures, within the
limits of funds and borrowing authority
available to each such corporation or agency
and in accordance with law, and to make
such contracts and commitments without regard to fiscal year limitations as provided by
section 104 of such Act as may be necessary
in carrying out the programs set forth in the
budget for 2026 for such corporation or agency except as hereinafter provided: Provided,
That collections of these corporations and
agencies may be used for new loan or mortgage purchase commitments only to the extent expressly provided for in this Act (unless such loans are in support of other forms
of assistance provided for in this or prior appropriations Acts), except that this proviso
shall not apply to the mortgage insurance or
guaranty operations of these corporations,
or where loans or mortgage purchases are
necessary to protect the financial interest of
the United States Government.
SEC. 207. None of the funds made available
by this title may be used for an audit of the
Government National Mortgage Association
that makes applicable requirements under
the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990 (2
U.S.C. 661 et seq.).
SEC. 208. (a) Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, subject to the conditions

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

listed under this section, for fiscal years 2026
and 2027, the Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development may authorize the transfer of
some or all project-based assistance, debt
held or insured by the Secretary and statutorily required low-income and very low-income use restrictions if any, associated with
one or more multifamily housing project or
projects to another multifamily housing
project or projects.
(b) PHASED TRANSFERS.—Transfers of
project-based assistance under this section
may be done in phases to accommodate the
financing and other requirements related to
rehabilitating or constructing the project or
projects to which the assistance is transferred, to ensure that such project or
projects meet the standards under subsection
(c).
(c) The transfer authorized in subsection
(a) is subject to the following conditions:
(1) NUMBER AND BEDROOM SIZE OF UNITS.—
(A) For occupied units in the transferring
project: The number of low-income and very
low-income units and the configuration (i.e.,
bedroom size) provided by the transferring
project shall be no less than when transferred to the receiving project or projects
and the net dollar amount of Federal assistance provided to the transferring project
shall remain the same in the receiving
project or projects. The Secretary, upon determination of good cause, including a determination that there will be no loss of assistance to currently assisted households, may
authorize a different number of such units or
a change in such configuration, or both, at
the receiving project or projects in the event
there is a transfer of use restrictions without
an associated transfer of project-based assistance to the receiving project. The Secretary shall publish a notice in the Federal
Register for public comment containing the
criteria for determinations of good cause no
less than 60 days before the effective date of
such notice.
(B) For unoccupied units in the transferring project: The Secretary may authorize a
reduction in the number of dwelling units in
the receiving project or projects to allow for
a reconfiguration of bedroom sizes to meet
current market demands, as determined by
the Secretary and provided there is no increase in the project-based assistance budget
authority.
(2) The transferring project shall, as determined by the Secretary, be either physically
obsolete or economically nonviable, or be
reasonably expected to become economically
nonviable when complying with State or
Federal requirements for community integration and reduced concentration of individuals with disabilities.
(3) The receiving project or projects shall
meet or exceed applicable physical standards
established by the Secretary.
(4) The owner or mortgagor of the transferring project shall notify and consult with the
tenants residing in the transferring project
and provide a certification of approval by all
appropriate local governmental officials.
(5) The tenants of the transferring project
who remain eligible for assistance to be provided by the receiving project or projects
shall not be required to vacate their units in
the transferring project or projects until new
units in the receiving project are available
for occupancy.
(6) The Secretary determines that this
transfer is in the best interest of the tenants.
(7) If either the transferring project or the
receiving project or projects meets the condition specified in subsection (d)(2)(A), any
lien on the receiving project resulting from
additional financing obtained by the owner
shall be subordinate to any FHA-insured
mortgage lien transferred to, or placed on,
such project by the Secretary, except that

PO 00000

Frm 00086

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

the Secretary may waive this requirement
upon determination that such a waiver is
necessary to facilitate the financing of acquisition, construction, and/or rehabilitation
of the receiving project or projects.
(8) If the transferring project meets the requirements of subsection (d)(2), the owner or
mortgagor of the receiving project or
projects shall execute and record either a
continuation of the existing use agreement
or a new use agreement for the project
where, in either case, any use restrictions in
such agreement are of no lesser duration
than the existing use restrictions.
(9) The transfer does not increase the cost
(as defined in section 502 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 661a)) of
any FHA-insured mortgage, except to the extent that appropriations are provided in advance for the amount of any such increased
cost.
(d) For purposes of this section—
(1) the terms ‘‘low-income’’ and ‘‘very lowincome’’ shall have the meanings provided
by the statute and/or regulations governing
the program under which the project is insured or assisted;
(2) the term ‘‘multifamily housing project’’
means housing that meets one of the following conditions—
(A) housing that is subject to a mortgage
insured under the National Housing Act;
(B) housing that has project-based assistance attached to the structure including
projects undergoing mark to market debt restructuring under the Multifamily Assisted
Housing Reform and Affordability Housing
Act;
(C) housing that is assisted under section
202 of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 U.S.C.
1701q);
(D) housing that is assisted under section
202 of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 U.S.C.
1701q), as such section existed before the enactment of the Cranston-Gonzales National
Affordable Housing Act;
(E) housing that is assisted under section
811 of the Cranston-Gonzales National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 8013); or
(F) housing or vacant land that is subject
to a use agreement;
(3) the term ‘‘project-based assistance’’
means—
(A) assistance provided under section 8(b)
of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42
U.S.C. 1437f(b));
(B) assistance for housing constructed or
substantially rehabilitated pursuant to assistance provided under section 8(b)(2) of
such Act (as such section existed immediately before October 1, 1983);
(C) rent supplement payments under section 101 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965 (12 U.S.C. 1701s);
(D) interest reduction payments under section 236 and/or additional assistance payments under section 236(f)(2) of the National
Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z–1);
(E) assistance payments made under section 202(c)(2) of the Housing Act of 1959 (12
U.S.C. 1701q(c)(2)); and
(F) assistance payments made under section 811(d)(2) of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C.
8013(d)(2));
(4) the term ‘‘receiving project or projects’’
means the multifamily housing project or
projects to which some or all of the projectbased assistance, debt, and statutorily required low-income and very low-income use
restrictions are to be transferred;
(5) the term ‘‘transferring project’’ means
the multifamily housing project which is
transferring some or all of the project-based
assistance, debt, and the statutorily required
low-income and very low-income use restrictions to the receiving project or projects;
and

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

(6) the term ‘‘Secretary’’ means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
(e) RESEARCH REPORT.—The Secretary
shall conduct an evaluation of the transfer
authority under this section, including the
effect of such transfers on the operational efficiency, contract rents, physical and financial conditions, and long-term preservation
of the affected properties.
SEC. 209. No assistance shall be provided
under section 8 of the United States Housing
Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f) to any individual
who—
(1) is enrolled as a student at an institution of higher education (as defined under
section 102 of the Higher Education Act of
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1002));
(2) is under 24 years of age;
(3) is not a veteran;
(4) is unmarried;
(5) does not have a dependent child;
(6) is not a person with disabilities, as such
term is defined in section 3(b)(3)(E) of the
United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C.
1437a(b)(3)(E)) and was not receiving assistance under such section 8 as of November 30,
2005;
(7) is not a youth who left foster care at
age 14 or older and is at risk of becoming
homeless; and
(8) is not otherwise individually eligible, or
has parents who, individually or jointly, are
not eligible, to receive assistance under section 8 of the United States Housing Act of
1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f).
SEC. 210. The funds made available for Native Alaskans under paragraph (1) under the
heading ‘‘Native American Programs’’ in
title II of this Act shall be allocated to the
same Native Alaskan housing block grant recipients that received funds in fiscal year
2005, and only such recipients shall be eligible to apply for funds made available under
paragraph (2) of such heading.
SEC. 211. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in fiscal year 2026, in managing
and disposing of any multifamily property
that is owned or has a mortgage held by the
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and during the process of foreclosure
on any property with a contract for rental
assistance payments under section 8 of the
United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C.
1437f) or any other Federal programs, the
Secretary shall maintain any rental assistance payments under section 8 of the United
States Housing Act of 1937 and other programs that are attached to any dwelling
units in the property. To the extent the Secretary determines, in consultation with the
tenants and the local government that such
a multifamily property owned or having a
mortgage held by the Secretary is not feasible for continued rental assistance payments under such section 8 or other programs, based on consideration of (1) the costs
of rehabilitating and operating the property
and all available Federal, State, and local resources, including rent adjustments under
section 524 of the Multifamily Assisted Housing Reform and Affordability Act of 1997 (in
this section ‘‘MAHRAA’’) (42 U.S.C. 1437f
note), and (2) environmental conditions that
cannot be remedied in a cost-effective fashion, the Secretary may, in consultation with
the tenants of that property, contract for
project-based rental assistance payments
with an owner or owners of other existing
housing properties, or provide other rental
assistance. The Secretary shall also take appropriate steps to ensure that project-based
contracts remain in effect prior to foreclosure, subject to the exercise of contractual abatement remedies to assist relocation
of tenants for imminent major threats to
health and safety after written notice to and
informed consent of the affected tenants and
use of other available remedies, such as par-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1261

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

tial abatements or receivership. After disposition of any multifamily property described in this section, the contract and allowable rent levels on such properties shall
be subject to the requirements under section
524 of MAHRAA.
SEC. 212. Public housing agencies that own
and operate 400 or fewer public housing units
may elect to be exempt from any asset management requirement imposed by the Secretary in connection with the operating fund
rule: Provided, That an agency seeking a discontinuance of a reduction of subsidy under
the operating fund formula shall not be exempt from asset management requirements.
SEC. 213. With respect to the use of
amounts provided in this Act and in future
Acts for the operation, capital improvement,
and management of public housing as authorized by sections 9(d) and 9(e) of the
United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C.
1437g(d), (e)), the Secretary shall not impose
any requirement or guideline relating to
asset management that restricts or limits in
any way the use of capital funds for central
office costs pursuant to paragraph (1) or (2)
of section 9(g) of the United States Housing
Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437g(g)(1), (2)): Provided, That a public housing agency may not
use capital funds authorized under section
9(d) for activities that are eligible under section 9(e) for assistance with amounts from
the operating fund in excess of the amounts
permitted under paragraph (1) or (2) of section 9(g).
SEC. 214. No official or employee of the Department of Housing and Urban Development
shall be designated as an allotment holder
unless the Office of the Chief Financial Officer has determined that such allotment holder has implemented an adequate system of
funds control and has received training in
funds control procedures and directives. The
Chief Financial Officer shall ensure that
there is a trained allotment holder for each
HUD appropriation under the accounts ‘‘Executive Offices’’, ‘‘Administrative Support
Offices’’, ‘‘Program Offices’’, ‘‘Government
National Mortgage Association—Guarantees
of Mortgage-Backed Securities Loan Guarantee Program Account’’, and ‘‘Office of Inspector General’’ within the Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
SEC. 215. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, for fiscal year 2026, the Secretary
may make a notice of funding opportunity,
and a notice of any funding decision, for any
program or discretionary fund administered
by the Secretary that is to be competitively
awarded available only on the Internet at
the appropriate Government website or
through other electronic media, as determined by the Secretary.
SEC. 216. Payment of attorney fees in program-related litigation shall be paid from
the individual program office and Office of
General Counsel salaries and expenses appropriations.
SEC. 217. The Secretary is authorized to
transfer up to 10 percent or $5,000,000, whichever is less, of funds appropriated for any office under the headings ‘‘Administrative
Support Offices’’ or ‘‘Program Offices’’ to
any other such office under such headings:
Provided, That the Secretary shall provide
notification to such Committees 5 business
days in advance of any such transfers.
SEC. 218. (a) Any entity receiving housing
assistance payments shall maintain decent,
safe, and sanitary conditions, as determined
by the Secretary, and comply with any
standards under applicable State or local
laws, rules, ordinances, or regulations relating to the physical condition of any property
covered under a housing assistance payment
contract.
(b) The Secretary shall take action under
subsection (c) when a multifamily housing

PO 00000

Frm 00087

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

project with a contract under section 8 of the
United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C.
1437f) or a contract for similar project-based
assistance—
(1) receives a failing score under the Uniform Physical Condition Standards (UPCS)
or successor standard; or
(2) fails to certify in writing to the Secretary within 3 days that all Exigent Health
and Safety deficiencies, or those deficiencies
requiring correction within 24 hours, identified by the inspector at the project have been
corrected.
Such requirements shall apply to insured
and noninsured projects with assistance attached to the units under section 8 of the
United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C.
1437f), but shall not apply to such units assisted under section 8(o)(13) of such Act (42
U.S.C. 1437f(o)(13)) or to public housing units
assisted with capital or operating funds
under section 9 of the United States Housing
Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437g).
(c)(1) Within 15 days of the issuance of the
Real Estate Assessment Center (‘‘REAC’’) inspection, the Secretary shall provide the
owner with a Notice of Default with a specified timetable, determined by the Secretary,
for correcting all deficiencies. The Secretary
shall provide a copy of the Notice of Default
to the tenants, the local government, any
mortgagees, and any contract administrator.
If the owner’s appeal results in a passing
score, the Secretary may withdraw the Notice of Default.
(2) At the end of the time period for correcting all deficiencies specified in the Notice of Default, if the owner fails to fully correct such deficiencies, the Secretary may—
(A) require immediate replacement of
project management with a management
agent approved by the Secretary;
(B) impose civil money penalties, which
shall be used solely for the purpose of supporting safe and sanitary conditions at applicable properties, as designated by the Secretary, with priority given to the tenants of
the property affected by the penalty;
(C) abate the section 8 contract, including
partial abatement, as determined by the Secretary, until all deficiencies have been corrected;
(D) pursue transfer of the project to an
owner, approved by the Secretary under established procedures, who will be obligated
to promptly make all required repairs and to
accept renewal of the assistance contract if
such renewal is offered;
(E) transfer the existing section 8 contract
to another project or projects and owner or
owners;
(F) pursue exclusionary sanctions, including suspensions or debarments from Federal
programs;
(G) seek judicial appointment of a receiver
to manage the property and cure all project
deficiencies or seek a judicial order of specific performance requiring the owner to
cure all project deficiencies;
(H) work with the owner, lender, or other
related party to stabilize the property in an
attempt to preserve the property through
compliance, transfer of ownership, or an infusion of capital provided by a third-party
that requires time to effectuate; or
(I) take any other regulatory or contractual remedies available as deemed necessary
and appropriate by the Secretary.
(d) The Secretary shall take appropriate
steps to ensure that project-based contracts
remain in effect, subject to the exercise of
contractual abatement remedies to assist relocation of tenants for major threats to
health and safety after written notice to the
affected tenants. To the extent the Secretary
determines, in consultation with the tenants
and the local government, that the property

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1262

is not feasible for continued rental assistance payments under such section 8 or other
programs, based on consideration of—
(1) the costs of rehabilitating and operating the property and all available Federal,
State, and local resources, including rent adjustments under section 524 of the Multifamily Assisted Housing Reform and Affordability Act of 1997 (‘‘MAHRAA’’); and
(2) environmental conditions that cannot
be remedied in a cost-effective fashion, the
Secretary may contract for project-based
rental assistance payments with an owner or
owners of other existing housing properties,
or provide other rental assistance.
(e) The Secretary shall report semi-annually on all properties covered by this section
that are assessed through the Real Estate
Assessment Center and have failing physical
inspection scores or have received an unsatisfactory management and occupancy review
within the past 36 months. The report shall
include—
(1) identification of the enforcement actions being taken to address such conditions,
including imposition of civil money penalties and termination of subsidies, and identification of properties that have such conditions multiple times;
(2) identification of actions that the Department of Housing and Urban Development
is taking to protect tenants of such identified properties; and
(3) any administrative or legislative recommendations to further improve the living
conditions at properties covered under a
housing assistance payment contract.
The first report shall be submitted to the
Senate and House Committees on Appropriations not later than 30 days after the enactment of this Act, and the second report shall
be submitted within 180 days of the transmittal of the first report.
SEC. 219. None of the funds made available
by this Act, or any other Act, for purposes
authorized under section 8 (only with respect
to the tenant-based rental assistance program) and section 9 of the United States
Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437 et seq.),
may be used by any public housing agency
for any amount of salary, including bonuses,
for the chief executive officer of which, or
any other official or employee of which, that
exceeds the annual rate of basic pay payable
for a position at level IV of the Executive
Schedule at any time during any public
housing agency fiscal year 2026.
SEC. 220. None of the funds made available
by this Act and provided to the Department
of Housing and Urban Development may be
used to make, withdraw, terminate, or rescind (except at the request of the recipient)
a grant award unless the Secretary notifies
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations not less than 3 full business days
before any project, State, locality, housing
authority, tribe, nonprofit organization, or
other entity selected to receive a grant
award is announced or is notified of such
changes by the Department or its offices:
Provided, That such notification shall list
each grant award and project description by
State and congressional district.
SEC. 221. None of the funds made available
in this Act shall be used by the Federal
Housing Administration, the Government
National Mortgage Association, or the Department of Housing and Urban Development
to insure, securitize, or establish a Federal
guarantee of any mortgage or mortgage
backed security that refinances or otherwise
replaces a mortgage that has been subject to
eminent domain condemnation or seizure, by
a State, municipality, or any other political
subdivision of a State.
SEC. 222. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to terminate the
status of a unit of general local government

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

as a metropolitan city (as defined in section
102 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5302)) with respect
to grants under section 106 of such Act (42
U.S.C. 5306).
SEC. 223. Amounts made available by this
Act that are appropriated, allocated, advanced on a reimbursable basis, or transferred to the Office of Policy Development
and Research of the Department of Housing
and Urban Development and functions thereof, for research, evaluation, or statistical
purposes, and that are unexpended at the
time of completion of a contract, grant, or
cooperative agreement, may be deobligated
and shall immediately become available and
may be reobligated in that fiscal year or the
subsequent fiscal year for the research, evaluation, or statistical purposes for which the
amounts are made available to that Office
subject to reprogramming requirements in
section 405 of this Act.
SEC. 224. None of the funds provided in this
Act or any other Act may be used for awards,
including performance, special act, or spot,
for any employee of the Department of Housing and Urban Development subject to administrative discipline (including suspension
from work), in this fiscal year, but this prohibition shall not be effective prior to the effective date of any such administrative discipline or after any final decision over-turning such discipline.
SEC. 225. With respect to grant amounts
awarded under the heading ‘‘Homeless Assistance Grants’’ for fiscal years 2015 through
2026 for the continuum of care (CoC) program
as authorized under subtitle C of title IV of
the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance
Act, costs paid by program income of grant
recipients may count toward meeting the recipient’s matching requirements, provided
the costs are eligible CoC costs that supplement the recipient’s CoC program.
SEC. 226. (a) From amounts made available
under this title under the heading ‘‘Homeless
Assistance Grants’’, the Secretary may
award 1-year transition grants to recipients
of funds for activities under subtitle C of the
McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act
(42 U.S.C. 11381 et seq.) to transition from
one continuum of care program component
to another.
(b) In order to be eligible to receive a transition grant, the funding recipient must have
the consent of the continuum of care and
meet standards determined by the Secretary.
SEC. 227. The promise zone designations
and promise zone designation agreements entered into pursuant to such designations,
made by the Secretary in prior fiscal years,
shall remain in effect in accordance with the
terms and conditions of such agreements (including designation and agreement time periods).
SEC. 228. Any public housing agency designated as a Moving to Work agency pursuant to section 239 of division L of Public Law
114–113 (42 U.S.C. 1437f note; 129 Stat. 2897)
may, upon such designation, use funds (except for special purpose funding, including
special purpose vouchers) previously allocated to any such public housing agency
under section 8 or 9 of the United States
Housing Act of 1937, including any reserve
funds held by the public housing agency or
funds held by the Department of Housing and
Urban Development, pursuant to the authority for use of section 8 or 9 funding provided
under such section and section 204 of title II
of the Departments of Veterans Affairs and
Housing and Urban Development and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 1996
(Public Law 104–134; 110 Stat. 1321–28), notwithstanding the purposes for which such
funds were appropriated.
SEC. 229. None of the amounts made available by this Act may be used to prohibit any

PO 00000

Frm 00088

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

public housing agency under receivership or
the direction of a Federal monitor from applying for, receiving, or using funds made
available under the heading ‘‘Public Housing
Fund’’ for competitive grants to evaluate
and reduce lead-based paint hazards in this
Act or that remain available and not awarded from prior Acts, or be used to prohibit a
public housing agency from using such funds
to carry out any required work pursuant to
a settlement agreement, consent decree, voluntary agreement, or similar document for a
violation of the lead safe housing or lead disclosure rules.
SEC. 230. For fiscal year 2026, if the Secretary determines or has determined, for any
prior formula grant allocation administered
by the Secretary through the Offices of Public and Indian Housing, Community Planning
and Development, or Housing, that a recipient received an allocation greater than the
amount such recipient should have received
for a formula allocation cycle pursuant to
applicable statutes and regulations, the Secretary may adjust for any such funding error
in the next applicable formula allocation
cycle by (a) offsetting each such recipient’s
formula allocation (if eligible for a formula
allocation in the next applicable formula allocation cycle) by the amount of any such
funding error, and (b) reallocating any available balances that are attributable to the
offset to the recipient or recipients that
would have been allocated additional funds
in the formula allocation cycle in which any
such error occurred (if such recipient or recipients are eligible for a formula allocation
in the next applicable formula allocation
cycle) in an amount proportionate to such
recipient’s eligibility under the next applicable formula allocation cycle: Provided, That
all offsets and reallocations from such available balances shall be recorded against funds
available for the next applicable formula allocation cycle: Provided further, That the
term ‘‘next applicable formula allocation
cycle’’ means the first formula allocation
cycle for a program that is reasonably available for correction following such a Secretarial determination: Provided further, That
if, upon request by a recipient and giving
consideration to all Federal resources available to the recipient for the same grant purposes, the Secretary determines that the offset in the next applicable formula allocation
cycle would critically impair the recipient’s
ability to accomplish the purpose of the formula grant, the Secretary may adjust for the
funding error across two or more formula allocation cycles.
SEC. 231. The Secretary may transfer from
amounts made available for salaries and expenses under this title (excluding amounts
made available under the heading ‘‘Office of
Inspector General’’) to the heading ‘‘Information Technology Fund’’ for unforeseen information technology needs, including for
additional development, modernization, and
enhancement, to remain available until September 30, 2028: Provided, That the total
amount of such transfers shall not exceed
$5,000,000: Provided further, That this transfer
authority shall not be used to fund information technology projects or activities that
have known out-year development, modernization, or enhancement costs in excess of
$500,000: Provided further, That this transfer
authority shall not be used to allocate costs
across offices for broader departmental information technology needs: Provided further,
That the Secretary shall provide notification
to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations no fewer than 10 business days
in advance of any such transfer.
SEC. 232. The Secretary shall comply with
all process requirements, including public
notice and comment, when seeking to revise
any annual contributions contract: Provided,

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

That the Secretary shall provide public
housing authorities not less than 60 days for
public comment, and the Secretary shall
consider and respond to submitted comments.
SEC. 233. None of the funds made available
to the Department of Housing and Urban Development in this or prior Acts may be used
to issue a solicitation or accept bids on any
solicitation that is substantially equivalent
to the draft solicitation entitled ‘‘Housing
Assistance Payments (HAP) Contract Support
Services
(HAPSS)’’
posted
to
www.Sam.gov on July 27, 2022.
SEC. 234. (a) Any unobligated balances from
amounts made available under the heading,
‘‘Community Development Fund’’ in chapter
9 of title II of the Emergency Supplemental
Appropriations Act for Defense, the Global
War on Terror, and Hurricane Recovery, 2006
(Public Law 109–234) that were transferred to
‘‘Management and Administration, Salaries
and Expenses’’ are hereby permanently rescinded.
(b) Any unobligated balances included
under Treasury Appropriation Fund Symbol
86 X 0108 from amounts transferred to the
Department of Housing and Urban Development from amounts made available under
the heading, ‘‘Unanticipated Needs’’ in chapter 8 of title I of the Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act of 1994 (Public
Law 103–211) are hereby permanently rescinded.
(c) Any unobligated balances included
under Treasury Appropriation Fund Symbol
86 X 0148, 86–2023/2027–0483 and 86 X 0163 are
hereby permanently rescinded.
(d) Of the unobligated balances from
amounts included under Treasury Appropriation Fund Symbol 86 X 0304, $5,036,988.73 are
hereby permanently rescinded.
(e) Of the unobligated balances from appropriations made available under the heading
‘‘Community Development Fund’’ prior to
fiscal year 2011, $176,688.49 in Economic Development Initiative grant funds and
$336,275.98 in Special Purpose Grant funds are
hereby rescinded.
(f) Of the unobligated balances from
amounts made available under the heading
‘‘Assisted Housing Inspections and Risk Assessments’’, in the Full-Year Continuing Appropriations and Extensions Act, 2025 (Public
Law 119–4), $22,000,000 are hereby permanently rescinded.
(g) Of the unobligated balances from
amounts included under Treasury Appropriation Fund Symbol 86 X 0313, $1.74 is hereby
permanently rescinded.
(h) $5,200,000 of amounts previously made
available for expenditure from the Manufactured Housing Fees Trust Fund are hereby
permanently rescinded.
SEC. 235. None of the amounts made available in this or prior Acts may be used to consider family self-sufficiency achievement
metrics (FAM) in determining funding
awards for programs receiving family selfsufficiency program coordinator funding provided in this or prior Acts except to provide
bonus awards as expressly made available in
this or prior Acts for self-sufficiency programs assigned a ranking of performance
category 1 based on their publicly available
FAM scores.
SEC. 236. The Secretary may, upon a finding that a waiver or alternative requirement
is necessary for the effective delivery and administration of funds made available for new
incremental voucher assistance or renewals
for the mainstream program and the family
unification program (including the foster
youth to independence program) in this and
prior Acts, waive or specify alternative requirements, other than requirements related
to tenant rights and protections, rent setting, fair housing, nondiscrimination, labor
standards, and the environment, for—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1263

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(1) section 8(o)(6)(A) of the United States
Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f(o)(6)(A))
and regulatory provisions related to the administration of waiting lists, local preferences, and the initial term and extensions
of tenant-based vouchers; and
(2) section 8(x)(2) of the United States
Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f(x)(2)) regarding the timing of referral of youth leaving foster care.
SEC. 237. The Secretary shall fulfill their
responsibilities to enforce the Fair Housing
Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq.): Provided, That
none of the funds made available by this Act
may be used by the Department of Housing
and Urban Development to direct a grantee
to undertake specific changes to existing
zoning laws as part of carrying out the interim final rule entitled ‘‘Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Revisions’’ (90 Fed.
Reg. 11020 (March 3, 2025)).
SEC. 238. The whistleblower protections in
section 4712 of title 41, United States Code,
shall apply to any contract, subcontract,
grant, subgrant, or personal services contract funded from amounts made available in
this or prior Acts (including carryover and
recaptures), regardless of when the agreement was executed.
SEC. 239. (a) For fiscal years 2026 through
2028, upon request from the owner, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
(‘‘Secretary’’) may forgive or restructure the
terms of any indebtedness relating to any remaining principal and interest under financial assistance made available under section
201 of the Housing and Community Development Amendments of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 1715z–1a)
(‘‘Flex Sub loan’’).
(b) The Secretary may only forgive or restructure loans under this section for properties with—
(1) 200 or fewer assisted units;
(2) a Flex Sub loan with an unpaid principal balance of $2,000,000 or less;
(3) a score of 80 or higher on the most recent REAC inspection; and
(4) a most recent management and occupancy review score of ‘‘above average’’ or
‘‘superior.’’
(c) The Secretary may set such terms and
conditions as the Secretary determines are
appropriate for forgiveness or restructuring
under this section, including:
(1) Different maturity dates or interest
rate terms;
(2) Extension of affordability use agreements; and
(3) Other measures to ensure the long-term
stability of operations at the property.
(d) There is hereby appropriated $2,000,000,
to remain available until September 30, 2029,
to carry out the purposes of this section, in
addition to amounts otherwise available for
such purposes.
SEC. 240. Funds previously made available
by the Consolidated and Further Continuing
Appropriations Act, 2013 (Public Law 113–6)
for initial project rental assistance contracts
associated with the demonstration program
under the heading ‘‘Housing for Persons with
Disabilities’’ in the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2012
(Public Law 112–55) that were available for
obligation through fiscal year 2016 are to remain available through fiscal year 2031 for
the liquidation of valid obligations incurred
in fiscal years 2013 through 2016.
SEC. 241. Amounts made available for the
Office of Housing under the heading ‘‘Program Offices’’ in this and prior Acts shall
also be available, without additional competition, for cooperative agreements with
participating administrative entities that
have been selected under section 513(b) of the
Multifamily Assisted Housing Reform and
Affordability Act of 1997 (42 U.S.C. 1437f note)
(MAHRAA) to provide direct support, includ-

PO 00000

Frm 00089

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ing carrying out due diligence and underwriting functions for owners and for technical assistance activities, on conditions established by the Secretary for small properties and owners converting assistance
under the first component or the second
component under the heading ‘‘Rental Assistance Demonstration’’ in the Department
of Housing and Urban Development Appropriations Act, 2012 (title II of division C of
Public Law 112–55).
SEC. 242. The Secretary shall conduct all
rulemaking in accordance with the policies
of part 10 of title 24 of the Code of Federal
Regulations and Executive Order 12866, as
amended, including providing for public participation and not less than 60 days for the
submission of written comments.
SEC. 243. For fiscal year 2026, the costs of
any rent incentives as authorized pursuant
to waivers or alternative requirements of the
jobs-plus initiative as described under the
heading ‘‘Self-Sufficiency Programs’’ shall
not be charged against the competitive grant
amounts made available under such heading:
Provided, That the amount of any forgone increases in tenant rent payments due to the
implementation of such rent incentives shall
be factored into the public housing agency’s
general operating fund eligibility pursuant
to the formula under the heading ‘‘Public
Housing Fund’’: Provided further, That the
amount of any foregone increases in tenant
rent payments due to the implementation of
such rent incentives implemented on behalf
of residents of a project with assistance converted from public housing to project-based
rental assistance under section 8 of the
United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C.
1437f) or assistance under section 8(o)(13) of
such Act under the heading ‘‘Rental Assistance Demonstration’’ in the Department of
Housing and Urban Development Appropriations Act, 2012 (title II of division C of Public
Law 112–55), as amended (42 U.S.C. 1437f note)
shall be factored into (1) housing assistance
payments made pursuant to project-based
subsidy contracts provided under the heading ‘‘Project-Based Rental Assistance’’; and
(2) housing assistance payments made by
public housing agencies pursuant to projectbased assistance contracts under section
8(o)(13) of such Act, with these costs being
renewed under the heading ‘‘Tenant-Based
Rental Assistance’’.
SEC. 244. In allocating and awarding available amounts provided under the heading
‘‘Homeless Assistance Grants’’ in the Department of Housing and Urban Development
Appropriations Act, 2025 (Public Law 119–04)
and under section 231 of Public Law 116–94 for
the continuum of care program, the Secretary shall, prior to awarding any amounts
through a notice of funding opportunity and
notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions
in such Acts or in subtitle C of title IV of the
McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act,
non-competitively renew for one 12-month
period all projects (including youth homelessness demonstration projects and shelter
plus care projects) expiring during the first
quarter of calendar year 2026 (including any
projects that expired from January 1, 2026
through the date of enactment of this Act):
Provided, That if awards have not been made
under a fiscal year 2025 notice of funding opportunity prior to April 1, 2026, the Secretary
shall also non-competitively renew all such
projects expiring during the second quarter
of calendar year 2026: Provided further, That
if awards have not been made under a fiscal
year 2025 notice of funding opportunity prior
to July 1, 2026, the Secretary shall also noncompetitively renew all such projects expiring during the third and fourth quarters of
calendar year 2026: Provided further, That
such renewals shall be in an amount equal to
the prior award with upward adjustments to

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1264

enable renewal projects to operate at substantially the same levels, including cost-ofliving adjustments for supportive services
from the prior grant and due to changes to
the fair market rents in the geographic area:
Provided further, That amounts remaining
after all such renewals are made shall be
competitively awarded pursuant to a notice
of funding opportunity: Provided further,
That such renewals shall not render recipients ineligible for awards under any fiscal
year 2025 and fiscal year 2026 notices of funding opportunity.
This title may be cited as the ‘‘Department
of Housing and Urban Development Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
TITLE III
RELATED AGENCIES
ACCESS BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For expenses necessary for the Access
Board, as authorized by section 502 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 792),
$9,955,000: Provided, That, notwithstanding
any other provision of law, there may be
credited to this appropriation funds received
for publications and training expenses.
FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSION
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Federal Maritime Commission as authorized by section
46107 of title 46, United States Code, including services as authorized by section 3109 of
title 5, United States Code; hire of passenger
motor vehicles as authorized by section
1343(b) of title 31, United States Code; and
uniforms or allowances therefor, as authorized by sections 5901 and 5902 of title 5,
United States Code, $40,000,000, of which
$2,000,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That not to exceed
$3,500 shall be for official reception and representation expenses.
NATIONAL RAILROAD PASSENGER CORPORATION
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General for the National Railroad
Passenger Corporation to carry out the provisions of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5
U.S.C. Chapter 4), $29,240,000: Provided, That
the Inspector General shall have all necessary authority, in carrying out the duties
specified in such Act, to investigate allegations of fraud, including false statements to
the Government under section 1001 of title
18, United States Code, by any person or entity that is subject to regulation by the National Railroad Passenger Corporation: Provided further, That the Inspector General
may enter into contracts and other arrangements for audits, studies, analyses, and
other services with public agencies and with
private persons, subject to the applicable
laws and regulations that govern the obtaining of such services within the National
Railroad Passenger Corporation: Provided
further, That the Inspector General may select, appoint, and employ such officers and
employees as may be necessary for carrying
out the functions, powers, and duties of the
Office of Inspector General, subject to the
applicable laws and regulations that govern
such selections, appointments, and employment within the National Railroad Passenger Corporation: Provided further, That
concurrent with the President’s budget request for fiscal year 2027, the Inspector General shall submit to the House and Senate
Committees on Appropriations a budget request for fiscal year 2027 in similar format
and substance to budget requests submitted
by executive agencies of the Federal Government.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the National
Transportation Safety Board, including hire
of passenger motor vehicles and aircraft;
services as authorized by section 3109 of title
5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the per diem rate
equivalent to the rate for a GS–15; uniforms,
or allowances therefor, as authorized by sections 5901 and 5902 of title 5, United States
Code, $145,000,000, of which not to exceed
$1,000 may be used for official reception and
representation expenses.
NEIGHBORHOOD REINVESTMENT CORPORATION
PAYMENT TO THE NEIGHBORHOOD
REINVESTMENT CORPORATION

For payment to the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation for use in neighborhood reinvestment activities, as authorized
by the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation Act (42 U.S.C. 8101–8107), $158,000,000:
Provided, That the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation shall notify network organizations of their full formula grant award
by the latter of 60 days after enactment of
this Act or March 1, 2026.
SURFACE TRANSPORTATION BOARD
SALARIES AND EXPENSES

For necessary expenses of the Surface
Transportation Board, including services authorized by section 3109 of title 5, United
States Code, $40,799,000: Provided, That, notwithstanding any other provision of law, not
to exceed $1,250,000 from fees established by
the Surface Transportation Board shall be
credited to this appropriation as offsetting
collections and used for necessary and authorized expenses under this heading: Provided further, That the amounts made available under this heading from the general
fund shall be reduced on a dollar-for-dollar
basis as such offsetting collections are received during fiscal year 2026, to result in a
final appropriation from the general fund estimated at not more than $39,549,000.
UNITED STATES INTERAGENCY COUNCIL ON
HOMELESSNESS
OPERATING EXPENSES

For necessary expenses, including payment
of salaries, authorized travel, hire of passenger motor vehicles, the rental of conference rooms, and the employment of experts and consultants under section 3109 of
title 5, United States Code, of the United
States Interagency Council on Homelessness
(in this heading ‘‘the Council’’) in carrying
out the functions pursuant to title II of the
McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act,
as amended, $3,000,000: Provided, That the
Council shall be staffed in accordance with
section 11313(a)(5) of title 42, United States
Code, and regional coordinators shall have
the proven expertise and demonstrated experience needed to carry out the duties specified in such section: Provided further, That
each meeting of the Council shall be open to
the public, and the Council shall post a public notification of each Council meeting not
less than 30 days in advance of each meeting
on its website and include the agenda for
each meeting in such posting.
TITLE IV
GENERAL PROVISIONS—THIS ACT
SEC. 401. None of the funds in this Act shall
be used for the planning or execution of any
program to pay the expenses of, or otherwise
compensate, non-Federal parties intervening
in regulatory or adjudicatory proceedings
funded in this Act.
SEC. 402. None of the funds appropriated in
this Act shall remain available for obligation beyond the current fiscal year, nor may
any be transferred to other appropriations,
unless expressly so provided herein.

PO 00000

Frm 00090

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SEC. 403. The expenditure of any appropriation under this Act for any consulting service through a procurement contract pursuant to section 3109 of title 5, United States
Code, shall be limited to those contracts
where such expenditures are a matter of public record and available for public inspection,
except where otherwise provided under existing law, or under existing Executive Order
issued pursuant to existing law.
SEC. 404. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be obligated or expended for any employee training that—
(1) does not meet identified needs for
knowledge, skills, and abilities bearing directly upon the performance of official duties;
(2) contains elements likely to induce high
levels of emotional response or psychological
stress in some participants;
(3) does not require prior employee notification of the content and methods to be used
in the training and written end of course
evaluation;
(4) contains any methods or content associated with religious or quasi-religious belief
systems or ‘‘new age’’ belief systems as defined in Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission Notice N–915.022, dated September 2, 1988; or
(5) is offensive to, or designed to change,
participants’ personal values or lifestyle outside the workplace.
(b) Nothing in this section shall prohibit,
restrict, or otherwise preclude an agency
from conducting training bearing directly
upon the performance of official duties.
SEC. 405. (a) Except as otherwise provided
in this Act or the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act), none of
the funds provided in this Act or provided by
previous appropriations Acts to the agencies
or entities funded in this Act that remain
available for obligation or expenditure in fiscal year 2026, or provided from any accounts
in the Treasury derived by the collection of
fees and available to the agencies funded by
this Act, shall be available for obligation or
expenditure through a reprogramming of
funds that—
(1) creates a new program;
(2) eliminates a program, project, or activity;
(3) increases funds or personnel for any
program, project, or activity for which funds
have been denied or restricted by the Congress;
(4) proposes to use funds directed for a specific activity by either the House or Senate
Committees on Appropriations for a different purpose;
(5) augments existing programs, projects,
or activities in excess of $5,000,000 or 10 percent, whichever is less;
(6) reduces existing programs, projects, or
activities by $5,000,000 or 10 percent, whichever is less; or
(7) creates, reorganizes, or restructures a
branch, division, office, bureau, board, commission, agency, administration, or department different from the budget justifications
submitted to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations, the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act), or the relevant operating plan properly
submitted by each agency, whichever is more
detailed.
(b) Not later than 60 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, each agency funded
by this Act shall submit an operating plan to
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations to establish the baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for the current fiscal year: Provided, That the operating plan shall include—

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

(1) a table for each appropriation with a
separate column to display the prior year enacted level, the President’s budget request,
adjustments made by Congress, adjustments
due to enacted rescissions, if appropriate,
and the fiscal year enacted level;
(2) a delineation in the table for (A) each
appropriation and its respective prior year
enacted level by object class and program,
project, and activity as detailed in this Act,
the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of
this consolidated Act), or in the budget appendix for the respective appropriations,
whichever is more detailed, (B) each item for
which a dollar amount is specified and for all
programs
for
which
new
budget
(obligational) authority is provided, and (C)
each discretionary grant and discretionary
grant allocation;
(3) an organizational chart that includes
current and estimated staffing numbers, by
office, at the customary level of detail unless
otherwise directed by this Act or the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in
the matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act); and
(4) an identification of items of special
congressional interest.
(c) Each agency may reprogram amounts
in excess of or contrary to the threshold limitations established in this section only
after—
(1) providing written notification to the
House and Senate Committees on Appropriations no less than 30 days in advance of such
reprogramming of funds; and
(2) receiving prior written approval from
the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations.
SEC. 406. Except as otherwise specifically
provided by law, not to exceed 50 percent of
unobligated balances remaining available at
the end of fiscal year 2026 from appropriations made available for salaries and expenses for fiscal year 2026 in this Act, shall
remain available through September 30, 2027,
for each such account for the purposes authorized: Provided, That a request shall be
submitted to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations for approval prior to
the expenditure of such funds: Provided further, That these requests shall be made in
compliance with reprogramming guidelines
under section 405 of this Act.
SEC. 407. No funds in this Act may be used
to support any Federal, State, or local
projects that seek to use the power of eminent domain, unless eminent domain is employed only for a public use: Provided, That
for purposes of this section, public use shall
not be construed to include economic development that primarily benefits private entities: Provided further, That any use of funds
for mass transit, railroad, airport, seaport or
highway projects, as well as utility projects
which benefit or serve the general public (including energy-related, communication-related, water-related and wastewater-related
infrastructure), other structures designated
for use by the general public or which have
other common-carrier or public-utility functions that serve the general public and are
subject to regulation and oversight by the
government, and projects for the removal of
an immediate threat to public health and
safety or brownfields as defined in the Small
Business Liability Relief and Brownfields
Revitalization Act (Public Law 107–118) shall
be considered a public use for purposes of
eminent domain.
SEC. 408. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be transferred to any department, agency, or instrumentality of the
United States Government, except pursuant
to a transfer made by, or transfer authority
provided in, this Act or any other appropriations Act.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1265

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

SEC. 409. No funds appropriated pursuant to
this Act may be expended by an entity unless the entity agrees that in expending the
assistance the entity will comply with sections 2 through 4 of the Act of March 3, 1933
(41 U.S.C. 8301–8305, popularly known as the
‘‘Buy American Act’’).
SEC. 410. No funds appropriated or otherwise made available under this Act shall be
made available to any person or entity that
has been convicted of violating the Buy
American Act (41 U.S.C. 8301–8305).
SEC. 411. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used for first-class airline
accommodations in contravention of sections 301–10.122 and 301–10.123 of title 41, Code
of Federal Regulations.
SEC. 412. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used to send or otherwise
pay for the attendance of more than 50 employees of a single agency or department of
the United States Government, who are stationed in the United States, at any single
international conference unless the relevant
Secretary reports to the House and Senate
Committees on Appropriations at least 5
days in advance that such attendance is important to the national interest: Provided,
That for purposes of this section the term
‘‘international conference’’ shall mean a
conference occurring outside of the United
States attended by representatives of the
United States Government and of foreign
governments, international organizations, or
nongovernmental organizations.
SEC. 413. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available under this Act may
be used by the Surface Transportation Board
to charge or collect any filing fee for rate or
practice complaints filed with the Board in
an amount in excess of the amount authorized for district court civil suit filing fees
under section 1914 of title 28, United States
Code.
SEC. 414. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used to maintain or
establish a computer network unless such
network blocks the viewing, downloading,
and exchanging of pornography.
(b) Nothing in subsection (a) shall limit
the use of funds necessary for any Federal,
State, tribal, or local law enforcement agency or any other entity carrying out criminal
investigations, prosecution, or adjudication
activities.
SEC. 415. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used to deny an Inspector General funded under this Act timely
access to any records, documents, or other
materials available to the department or
agency over which that Inspector General
has responsibilities under the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.), or to prevent
or impede that Inspector General’s access to
such records, documents, or other materials,
under any provision of law, except a provision of law that expressly refers to the Inspector General and expressly limits the Inspector General’s right of access.
(b) A department or agency covered by this
section shall provide its Inspector General
with access to all such records, documents,
and other materials in a timely manner.
(c) Each Inspector General shall ensure
compliance with statutory limitations on
disclosure relevant to the information provided by the establishment over which that
Inspector General has responsibilities under
the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C.
App.).
(d) Each Inspector General covered by this
section shall report to the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate within 5 calendar days
any failures to comply with this requirement.
SEC. 416. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available by this Act may be

PO 00000

Frm 00091

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

used to pay award or incentive fees for contractors whose performance has been judged
to be below satisfactory, behind schedule,
over budget, or has failed to meet the basic
requirements of a contract, unless the Agency determines that any such deviations are
due to unforeseeable events, governmentdriven scope changes, or are not significant
within the overall scope of the project and/or
program unless such awards or incentive fees
are consistent with 16.401(e)(2) of the Federal
Acquisition Regulations.
SEC. 417. No part of any appropriation contained in this Act shall be available to pay
the salary for any person filling a position,
other than a temporary position, formerly
held by an employee who has left to enter
the Armed Forces of the United States and
has satisfactorily completed his or her period of active military or naval service, and
has within 90 days after his or her release
from such service or from hospitalization
continuing after discharge for a period of not
more than 1 year, made application for restoration to his or her former position and
has been certified by the Office of Personnel
Management as still qualified to perform the
duties of his or her former position and has
not been restored thereto.
SEC. 418. (a) None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to approve a
new foreign air carrier permit under sections
41301 through 41305 of title 49, United States
Code, or exemption application under section
40109 of that title of an air carrier already
holding an air operators certificate issued by
a country that is party to the U.S.-E.U.-Iceland-Norway Air Transport Agreement
where such approval would contravene
United States law or Article 17 bis of the
U.S.-E.U.-Iceland-Norway
Air
Transport
Agreement.
(b) Nothing in this section shall prohibit,
restrict or otherwise preclude the Secretary
of Transportation from granting a foreign
air carrier permit or an exemption to such
an air carrier where such authorization is
consistent with the U.S.-E.U.-Iceland-Norway Air Transport Agreement and United
States law.
SEC. 419. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used in contravention of
existing Federal law regarding non-citizen
eligibility and ineligibility for occupancy in
federally assisted housing or for participation in and assistance under Federal housing
programs, including section 214 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1980
(42 U.S.C. 1436a) and title IV of the Personal
Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.).
SEC. 420. (a) No part of any appropriation
contained in this Act or title VIII of division
J of Public Law 117–58 shall be used, other
than for normal and recognized executivelegislative relationships, for publicity or
propaganda purposes, and for the preparation, distribution, or use of any kit, pamphlet, booklet, publication, radio, television,
or film presentation designed to support or
defeat legislation pending before the Congress, except in presentation to the Congress
itself.
(b) No part of any appropriation contained
in this Act or in title VIII of division J of
Public Law 117–58 shall be used to pay the
salary or expenses of any grant or contract
recipient, or agent acting for such recipient,
related to any activity designed to influence
the enactment of legislation or appropriations proposed or pending before the Congress, other than for normal and recognized
executive-legislative relationships.
(c) Amounts repurposed pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) shall continue to be
treated as amounts specified in section 103(b)
of division A of Public Law 118–5.
SEC. 421. (a) In the table of projects in the
explanatory statement referenced in section

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1266

417 of the Transportation, Housing and
Urban Development, and Related Agencies
Appropriations Act, 2022 (division L of Public
Law 117–103)—
(1) the item relating to ‘‘Kansas Rail Safety Improvement Project’’ is deemed to be
amended by striking recipient ‘‘Pittsburg
Port Authority (KS)’’ and inserting ‘‘Kansas
Department of Transportation’’;
(2) the item relating to ‘‘The Barkers
Creek Industrial Park Power Expansion’’ is
deemed to be amended by striking ‘‘The
Barkers Creek Industrial Park Power Expansion’’ and inserting ‘‘Barkers Creek Industrial Park Access Bridge, Phase II’’;
(3) the item relating to ‘‘Acquisition of
new commercial space’’ is deemed to be
amended by striking project ‘‘Acquisition of
new commercial space’’ and inserting ‘‘Renovation of commercial space’’;
(4) the item relating to ‘‘Electric school
bus and associated electric vehicle (EV)
charging infrastructure’’ is deemed to be
amended by striking recipient ‘‘Falls Church
City Public Schools’’ and inserting ‘‘City of
Falls Church’’;
(5) the item relating to ‘‘North Commons
Regional Vision’’ is deemed to be amended
by striking recipient ‘‘Minneapolis Park and
Recreation Board’’ and inserting ‘‘City of
Minneapolis’’;
(6) the item relating to ‘‘Orangewood
Parkette’’ is deemed to be amended by striking project ‘‘Orangewood Parkette’’ and inserting ‘‘Orangewood Complete Streets’’;
(7) the item relating to ‘‘Replacing Five
Elevators in a Public Housing Development’’
is deemed to be amended by striking project
‘‘Replacing Five Elevators in a Public Housing Development’’ and inserting ‘‘Replacing
Elevators in a Public Housing Development’’;
(8) the item relating to ‘‘Long Branch
Stream Valley Park Pedestrian Bridge Replacements and ADA Improvements’’ is
deemed to be amended by striking recipient
‘‘Montgomery County Government’’ and inserting ‘‘Maryland National Capital Park
and Planning Commission’’;
(9) the item relating to ‘‘Washington Gorge
Action Programs—Goldendale Childcare and
Early Learning Center’’ is deemed to be
amended by striking ‘‘Goldendale’’;
(10) the item relating to ‘‘Habitat for Humanity’s Veterans Blitz Build’’ is deemed to
be amended by striking recipient ‘‘Habitat
for Humanity San Bernardino Area, Inc.’’
and inserting ‘‘Neighborhood Partnership
Housing Services, Inc. (NPHS)’’;
(11) the item relating to ‘‘Allen University
Restoration of Historic Waverly-Good Samaritan Hospital’’ is deemed to be amended
by striking ‘‘Allen University Restoration of
Historic Waverly-Good Samaritan Hospital’’
and inserting ‘‘Facility Upgrades’’;
(12) the item relating to ‘‘The MEWS at
Spencer Road, Affordable Housing and Mixed
Use Development’’ is deemed to be amended
by striking ‘‘The MEWS at Spencer Road,’’;
and
(13) The item relating to ‘‘ARISE housing
for young adults transitioning out of foster
care’’ is deemed to be amended by striking
‘‘ARISE
housing
for
young
adults
transitioning out of foster care’’ and inserting ‘‘Construction of Housing in the City of
Greenville.’’
(b) In the table of projects entitled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ in the explanatory statement for division L of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023 (Public Law 117–328)
described in section 4 in the matter preceding division A of such Act—
(1) the item relating to ‘‘Lower Shore Clinic Co-Occurring Disorder Treatment Facility
Housing’’ is deemed to be amended by:

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

(A) striking ‘‘Lower Shore Clinic Co-Occurring Disorder Treatment Facility Housing’’
and inserting ‘‘HealthPort Co-Occurring Disorder Treatment Facility’’; and
(B) striking recipient ‘‘Lower Shore Clinic
Inc.’’ and inserting ‘‘HealthPort, Inc.’’;
(2) the item relating to ‘‘Metra Zero Emission Locomotive Commuter Rail Pilot’’ is
deemed to be amended by striking ‘‘Locomotive’’;
(3) the item relating to ‘‘Acquisition of
Property
for
the
Revitalization
of
Cliftondale Square Business District’’ is
deemed to be amended by striking ‘‘Acquisition of Property for the’’;
(4) the item relating to ‘‘Supportive Living, Community Day Services, and Housing
Site Project for Adults with Intellectual and
Developmental Disabilities’’ is deemed to be
amended by striking project ‘‘Supportive
Living, Community Day Services, and Housing Site Project for Adults with Intellectual
and Developmental Disabilities’’ and inserting ‘‘Community Day Services and Housing
Expansion for Adults with Intellectual and
Developmental Disabilities’’;
(5) the item relating to ‘‘Public Library
Addition’’ is deemed to be amended by striking project ‘‘Public Library Addition’’ and
inserting ‘‘Public Library Renovations’’;
(6) the item relating to ‘‘Renovation of
Snelling Motel to Affordable Housing for
Veterans’’ is deemed to be amended by striking project ‘‘Renovation of Snelling Motel to
Affordable Housing for Veterans’’ and inserting ‘‘Acquisition for Affordable Housing for
Veterans’’;
(7) the item relating to ‘‘El Centro de la
Raza-Pattison’s West Community Campus
Property Acquisition’’ is deemed to be
amended by striking project ‘‘El Centro de la
Raza-Pattison’s West Community Campus
Property Acquisition’’ and inserting ‘‘Pattison’s West Community Campus’’;
(8) the item relating to ‘‘Riverbrook Regional YMCA’’ is deemed to be amended by
striking recipient ‘‘Riverbrook Regional
Young Men’s Christian Association, Inc.’’
and inserting ‘‘City of Norwalk’’;
(9) the item relating to ‘‘The SE1 Rehab’’
is deemed to be amended by striking recipient ‘‘The Skid Row Housing Trust’’ and inserting ‘‘PATH Ventures’’ and striking
project ‘‘The SE1 Rehab’’ and inserting
‘‘Skid Row Permanent Supportive Housing
Rehabilitation’’;
(10) the item relating to ‘‘Community
Aging & Retirement Services, Inc.’’ is
deemed to be amended by striking recipient
‘‘Community Aging & Retirement Services,
Inc.’’ and inserting ‘‘Pasco County,’’ and
striking project ‘‘CARES One Stop Senior
Center Acquisition and Construction’’ and
inserting ‘‘Senior Center Acquisition and
Construction’’;
(11) the item relating to ‘‘Western Flyer
Coast Guard Pier Repair and Classroom Design’’ is deemed to be amended by striking
project ‘‘Western Flyer Coast Guard Pier Repair and Classroom Design’’ and inserting
‘‘Western Flyer Pier and Classroom Repair’’;
(12) the item relating to ‘‘NYCHA ADA Accessibility and Security Lighting Project’’ is
deemed to be amended by striking project
‘‘NYCHA ADA Accessibility and Security
Lighting Project’’ and inserting ‘‘Installation of Exterior Lighting at Borinquen Plaza
II’’;
(13) the item relating to ‘‘Ausonia Apartments Modernization’’ is deemed to be
amended by striking recipient ‘‘Ausonia
Apartments’’ and inserting ‘‘Boston Housing
Authority’’;
(14) the item relating to ‘‘Helping Up Mission Permanent Housing on East Baltimore
Street’’ is deemed to be amended by striking
‘‘Helping Up Mission Permanent Housing on

PO 00000

Frm 00092

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

East Baltimore Street’’ and inserting
‘‘Greenspace Development in Baltimore’’;
(15) the item relating to ‘‘The Choir School
of Delaware’s New Building at 8th and West
Street in Wilmington’s Historic Quaker Hill
District’’ is deemed to be amended by striking ‘‘at 8th and West Street in Wilmington’s
Historic Quaker Hill District’’ and inserting
‘‘in Wilmington’’;
(16) the item relating to ‘‘WTA 2011 Fixed
Route Diesel to Electric Replacement
Project, Bellingham’’ is deemed to be amended by striking ‘‘WTA 2011 Fixed Route Diesel
to Electric Replacement Project, Bellingham’’ and inserting ‘‘Acquisition of Hybrid-Electric Buses’’; and
(17) the item relating to ‘‘Media and Arts
Collaborative
Building
Renovation’’
is
deemed to be amended by striking ‘‘Renovation’’.
(c) In the table of projects entitled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ in the explanatory statement for division F of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 (Public Law 118–42) described in section 4 in the matter preceding
division A of such Act—
(1) the item relating to ‘‘Hardwoods Permanent Supportive Housing’’ is deemed to be
amended by striking ‘‘Hardwoods’’;
(2) the item relating to ‘‘Cle Elum—First
Street Downtown Revitalization’’ is deemed
to be amended by striking ‘‘First Street’’;
(3) the item relating to ‘‘Center for Community Programs in Livermore Falls and
Jay’’ is deemed to be amended by striking
recipient ‘‘United Way of the Tri-Valley
Area’’ and inserting ‘‘Town of Jay’’;
(4) the item relating to ‘‘Pawtucket Library, Sayles Building Re-Pointing’’ is
deemed to be amended by striking project
‘‘Pawtucket Library, Sayles Building RePointing’’ and inserting ‘‘Pawtucket Library, Sayles Building Renovation’’;
(5) the item relating to ‘‘Germany Road
Relocation Project’’ is deemed to be amended by striking project ‘‘Germany Road Relocation Project’’ and inserting ‘‘Sewer Improvements’’;
(6) the item relating to ‘‘Community Center Expansion and Land Acquisition’’ is
deemed to be amended by striking ‘‘Expansion and Land Acquisition’’ and inserting
‘‘Planning and Design’’;
(7) the item relating to ‘‘Laconia, NH Hill
Street Pedestrian Bridge Replacement’’ is
deemed to be amended by striking ‘‘Hill
Street’’ and inserting ‘‘Mill Street’’;
(8) the item relating to ‘‘Sunnyside Community Reinvestment as Cultura & Traditions: Tucson, AZ’’ is deemed to be amended
by striking recipient ‘‘Sunnyside Foundation’’ and inserting ‘‘Sunnyside Unified
School District’’;
(9) the item relating to ‘‘Craighead Technology Park and Public Safety Center’’ is
deemed to be amended by striking recipient
‘‘City Water and Light of Jonesboro’’ and inserting ‘‘City of Jonesboro’’;
(10) the item relating to ‘‘Capital Repairs
of 4 Affordable Housing properties, City of
Seattle, King County, WA’’ is deemed to be
amended by striking ‘‘4’’ and inserting ‘‘3’’;
(11) the item relating to ‘‘Middletown
Plaza Elevator Replacement’’ is deemed to
be amended by striking ‘‘Middletown Plaza
Elevator Replacement’’ and inserting ‘‘Security Upgrades at NYCHA’s Soundview
Houses’’;
(12) the item relating to ‘‘Morris Affordable Housing Infrastructure’’ is deemed to be
amended by striking recipient ‘‘Morris Affordable Housing Infrastructure’’ and inserting ‘‘Morris Housing Authority’’;
(13) the item relating to ‘‘Rehabilitation of
Historic Alumni House as Skills-based Workforce Development Community Center’’ is
deemed to be amended by striking ‘‘Historic

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

Alumni House as’’ and inserting ‘‘a building
for a’’;
(14) the item relating to ‘‘Mt. Airy/Germantown Streetscape Improvement and Reconnection’’ is deemed to be amended by
striking recipient ‘‘Mt. Airy Business Improvement District’’ and inserting ‘‘City of
Philadelphia’’;
(15) the item relating to ‘‘YMCA of Greater
Pittsburgh’’ is deemed to be amended by
striking ‘‘YMCA of Greater Pittsburgh’’ and
inserting ‘‘Allegheny YMCA Renovation’’;
(16) the item relating to ‘‘Corn Maiden
Early Learning Center’’ is deemed to be
amended by striking recipient ‘‘Corn Maiden
Early Learning Center’’ and inserting ‘‘Indian Pueblo Cultural Center’’;
(17) the item relating to ‘‘10th Street Realignment Project Overpass Project’’ is
deemed to be amended by striking recipient
‘‘City of Richmond’’ and inserting ‘‘Fort
Bend County’’; and
(18) the item relating to ‘‘S. Roosevelt
Road Share Use Path’’ is deemed to be
amended by striking ‘‘S. Roosevelt Road’’.
(d) Each amendment made by subsection
(a) shall be considered and treated as a continuation of an existing obligation of funds
and not as a new obligation of funds.
(e) Amounts made available under the
heading ‘‘Department of Transportation—
Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety
Improvements’’ for the item relating to
‘‘Midway Crossing’’ in the table of projects
entitled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ in the explanatory statement for division L of the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023 (Public Law 117–328) described in section 4 in the
matter preceding division A of such Act shall
be transferred to ‘‘Department of Transportation—Transit Infrastructure Grants’’ and
shall be available under the heading to which
transferred for its original purpose.
(1) The item relating to ‘‘Midway Crossing’’ is deemed to be amended by striking account ‘‘Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and
Safety Improvements’’ and inserting ‘‘Transit Infrastructure Grants’’ in the table of
projects entitled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ in
the explanatory statement for division L of
the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023
(Public Law 117–328) described in section 4 in
the matter preceding division A of such Act.
SEC. 422. The Department of Transportation and the Department of Housing and
Urban Development shall provide the House
and Senate Committees on Appropriations:
(1) quarterly reports on the status of all
funds, including the start of year unobligated and uncommitted balances, and the
total obligations and recaptures for the fiscal year, by program, project, and activity;
(2) semiannual reports on staffing levels,
hirings, and separations (including through
the deferred resignation program and any
other voluntary retirement programs), consistent with direction provided in this Act or
the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of
this consolidated Act); and
(3) additional, updated budget or financial
technical assistance, upon request.
SEC. 423. Each Department and agency
funded in this Act shall maintain on its publicly accessible website:
(1) notices of funding opportunities (including any amendments) for all competitive
grant programs issued in the most recent 10
years;
(2) grant awards for the most recent 10
years; and
(3) programmatic notices, guidance, and
grant agreement templates for any grant
program with disbursement activity within
the previous 5 fiscal years.
SEC. 424. No later than 30 days after the
date of enactment of this Act, and annually

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1267

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

thereafter, the Departments and agencies
funded under this Act shall submit a report
to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations on current staffing levels for all
political and Presidential appointees in such
Departments and agencies and categorized
by which office within such Departments and
agencies such employee is funded from, the
office in which such employee carries out
their daily work, such employee’s title, and
such employee’s pay grade or the equivalent
level based on the GS-scale.
SEC. 425. The assistance made available
under paragraph (5)(B) under the heading
‘‘Public and Indian Housing—Tenant-Based
Rental Assistance’’ in title II of this Act
shall be known and designated as ‘‘The
Melania Trump Foster Youth to Independence Initiative’’.
SEC. 426. (a) In the table titled ‘‘Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ in the explanatory statement for division A of the Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy and Water Development; and Interior and Environment Appropriations Act, 2026 described in section 4 in
the matter preceding division A of such
Act—
(1) the contents in the ‘‘Senate’’ sub column of the ‘‘Requestor(s)’’ column are
deemed to be amended by inserting ‘‘Kaine,
Warner’’ for the project identified as the
‘‘Center of Excellence in Environmental
Forecasting’’ for the recipient ‘‘Virginia Institute of Marine Science’’;
(2) the contents in the ‘‘Recipient’’ column
are deemed to be amended by—
(A) inserting ‘‘Research Foundation of
the’’ before ‘‘City University of New York on
behalf of Medgar Evers College’’ for the
project identified as ‘‘Advancing Scientific
Research Capabilities’’;
(B) inserting ‘‘Research Foundation of
the’’ before ‘‘State University of New York
on behalf of the University at Buffalo’’ for
the project identified as ‘‘Center of Excellence for Cross-Border Supply Chains’’;
(C) striking ‘‘Game Department/Great Bay
National Estuarine Research’’ and inserting
‘‘New Hampshire Fish and Game Department/Great Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve’’ for the project identified as
‘‘Great Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve: Research Facility’’;
(D) striking ‘‘of Albany’’ and inserting ‘‘at
Albany’’ for the project identified as
‘‘UAlbany CNSE 200mm Wafer Cleanroom
Equipment Upgrade’’; and
(E) striking ‘‘Penn’’ and inserting ‘‘Pennington’’ for the project identified as ‘‘Jail
Tech Upgrades’’; and
(3) the contents in the ‘‘Project’’ column
are deemed to be amended by inserting—
(A) ‘‘Chip Design Hub: Advanced Chip Design, Testing and’’ before ‘‘Fabrication Laboratory Equipment for Preparing the Semiconductor Workforce’’ for recipient ‘‘Florida
Atlantic University’’;
(B) ‘‘University of Texas at Dallas Comparative Effectiveness of’’ before ‘‘North
Texas Workforce Development Programs for
Semiconductors’’ for recipient ‘‘The University of Texas at Dallas’’;
(C) ‘‘D’Youville University School of Pharmacy Sterile’’ before ‘‘Compounding and
Non-Sterile Hazardous Compounding Lab’’
for recipient ‘‘D’Youville University’’;
(D) ‘‘Building the Workforce of the Future
Generation By’’ before ‘‘Empowering Underserved Students with Technology-based
STEM Education’’ for recipient ‘‘Research
Foundation of CUNY’’;
(E) ‘‘Additive Construction and Manufacturing Equipment for’’ before ‘‘Affordable
and Resilient Housing Research and Workforce Development’’ for recipient ‘‘Rowan
University’’; and

PO 00000

Frm 00093

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(F) ‘‘Interdisciplinary Engineering & Computing initiative to’’ before ‘‘Advance Semiconductor Industry and National Security
Project’’ for recipient ‘‘Florida International
University’’.
(b) The table titled ‘‘Department of Commerce Allocation of National Institute of
Standards and Technology Funds: CHIPS
Act Fiscal Year 2026’’ in the explanatory
statement for division A of the Commerce,
Justice, Science; Energy and Water Development; and Interior and Environment Appropriations Act, 2026 described in section 4 in
the matter preceding division A of such Act
is deemed to be amended by striking
‘‘(1,000,000)’’ and inserting ‘‘(100,000)’’ for the
‘‘Administrative Expenses’’ project and activity.
(c) In the table titled ‘‘Interior and Environment
Incorporation
of
Community
Project Funding/Congressionally Directed
Spending Items’’ in the explanatory statement for division C of the Commerce, Justice, Science; Energy and Water Development; and Interior and Environment Appropriations Act, 2026 described in section 4 in
the matter preceding division A of such Act,
the contents in the ‘‘Project Recipient and
Name’’ column for the ‘‘STAG—Other
(CDS)’’ account are deemed to be amended
by striking ‘‘COR Healthy Communities for
Waste Improvement System’’ and inserting
‘‘Oregon Metro for Waste Improvement System’’.
(d) The Department of the Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2026, is amended—
(1) in the matter preceding the first proviso under the heading ‘‘National Park Service—Operation of the National Park System’’ by striking ‘‘$2,877,195,000’’ and inserting ‘‘$2,901,195,000’’, striking ‘‘$148,285,000’’
and inserting ‘‘$157,165,000’’, and striking
‘‘$157,950,000’’ and inserting ‘‘$173,070,000’’;
and
(2) in the matter preceding the first proviso under the heading ‘‘National Park Service—Historic Preservation Fund’’, by striking
‘‘$205,059,000’’
and
inserting
‘‘$181,059,000’’.
This division may be cited as the ‘‘Transportation, Housing and Urban Development,
and Related Agencies Appropriations Act,
2026’’.
DIVISION E—AUTHORIZING EXTENDERS
AND TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS
SEC. 5001. UNITED STATES GRAIN STANDARDS
ACT EXTENSION.

Sections 7(j)(5), 7A(l)(4), and 21(e) of the
United States Grain Standards Act (7 U.S.C.
79(j)(5), 79a(l)(4), 87j(e)) shall be applied by
substituting ‘‘September 30, 2026’’ for ‘‘September 30, 2025’’ each place it appears.
SEC. 5002. COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION
WHISTLEBLOWER
PROGRAM.

Section 1(b) of Public Law 117–25 (135 Stat.
297; 136 Stat. 2133; 136 Stat. 5984; 139 Stat. 46)
is amended in each of paragraphs (3) and (4)
by striking ‘‘September 30, 2025’’ and inserting ‘‘September 30, 2026’’.
SEC. 5003. FOREST SERVICE PARTICIPATION IN
ACES PROGRAM.

Section 8302(b) of the Agricultural Act of
2014 (16 U.S.C. 3851a(b)) shall be applied by
substituting ‘‘October 1, 2026’’ for ‘‘October 1,
2023’’.
SEC. 5004. EXTENSION OF NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM.
(a) FINANCING.—Section 1309(a) of the Na-

tional Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C.
4016(a)) is amended, in the first sentence, by
striking ‘‘September 30, 2023’’ and inserting
‘‘September 30, 2026’’.
(b) PROGRAM EXPIRATION.—Section 1319 of
the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42
U.S.C. 4026) is amended by striking ‘‘September 30, 2023’’ and inserting ‘‘September
30, 2026’’.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1268

(c) EFFECTIVE DATE.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Subject to paragraph (2),
this section shall take effect immediately
upon the date of enactment of this Act.
(2) ALTERNATE DATE.—If this Act is enacted
after January 30, 2026, this section shall take
effect as if enacted on January 30, 2026.
SEC.

5005.

EXTENSION OF REIMBURSABLE
SCREENING SERVICES PROGRAM.

Section 225(e) of the Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2019 (division A of Public Law 116–6; 49 U.S.C. 44901
note) is amended by striking ‘‘2025’’ and inserting ‘‘2026’’.
SEC. 5006. MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ADVISORY
COMMITTEE.

Section 4144(d) of the Motor Carrier Safety
Reauthorization Act of 2005 (49 U.S.C. 31100
note; Public Law 109–59) shall be applied by
substituting ‘‘September 30, 2026’’ for ‘‘September 30, 2025’’.
SEC. 5007. NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY PROTECTION SYSTEM AUTHORIZATION.

Section 227(a) of the Federal Cybersecurity
Enhancement Act of 2015 (6 U.S.C. 1525(a)) is
amended by striking ‘‘September 30, 2025’’
and inserting ‘‘September 30, 2026’’.
SEC. 5008. CYBERSECURITY INFORMATION SHARING ACT OF 2015.

Section 111(a) of the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015 (6 U.S.C. 1510(a))
is amended by striking ‘‘September 30, 2025’’
and inserting ‘‘September 30, 2026’’.
SEC. 5009. STATE AND LOCAL CYBERSECURITY
GRANT PROGRAM.

Section 2220A(s)(1) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 665g(s)(1)) is amended by striking ‘‘September 30, 2025’’ and inserting ‘‘September 30, 2026’’.
SEC. 5010. EXTENSION OF THE TECHNOLOGY
MODERNIZATION FUND AND BOARD.

Section 1078(f)(1) of the National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (40
U.S.C. 11301 note) is amended by striking
‘‘On and after the date that is 2 years after
the date on which the Comptroller General
of the United States issues the third report
required under subsection (b)(7)(B)’’ and inserting ‘‘After September 30, 2026’’.
SEC. 5011. EXTENSION OF EXISTENCE OF PAROLE
COMMISSION.

Any expiration date established by section
235(b) of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984
(18 U.S.C. 3551 note; Public Law 98–473), as
such section relates to chapter 311 of title 18,
United States Code, and the United States
Parole Commission, shall not apply during
the period beginning on October 1, 2025, and
ending on January 30, 2031.
SEC. 5012. ADDITIONAL SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.

Section 3014(a) of title 18, United States
Code, is amended by striking ‘‘and ending on
September 30, 2025’’.
SEC. 5013. RURAL HEALTHCARE WORKERS.

Section 220(c) of the Immigration and Nationality Technical Corrections Act of 1994 (8
U.S.C. 1182 note) shall be applied by substituting ‘‘September 30, 2026’’ for ‘‘September 30, 2015’’.
SEC. 5014. E-VERIFY.

Section 401(b) of the Illegal Immigration
Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of
1996 (8 U.S.C. 1324a note) shall be applied by
substituting ‘‘September 30, 2026’’ for ‘‘September 30, 2015’’.
SEC. 5015. NON-MINISTER RELIGIOUS WORKERS.
DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Section 101(a)(27)(C)(ii) of the Immigration
and
Nationality
Act
(8
U.S.C.
1101(a)(27)(C)(ii)) shall be applied by substituting ‘‘September 30, 2026’’ for ‘‘September 30, 2015’’ each place such date appears.
SEC. 5016. H-2B SUPPLEMENTAL VISA EXEMPTION.

Notwithstanding the numerical limitation
set forth in section 214(g)(1)(B) of the Immi-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

gration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C.
1184(g)(1)(B)), the Secretary of Homeland Security, after consultation with the Secretary
of Labor, and upon the determination that
the needs of United States businesses cannot
be satisfied during fiscal year 2026 with
United States workers who are willing,
qualified, and able to perform temporary
nonagricultural labor, may increase the
total number of aliens who may receive a
visa under section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(b) of such
Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(b)) in such fiscal year by not more than the highest number of H–2B nonimmigrants who participated
in the H–2B returning worker program in any
fiscal year in which returning workers were
exempt from such numerical limitation.
SEC. 5017. EMERGENCY AUTHORITY FOR SENTENCING COMMISSION.
(a) IN GENERAL.—The United States Sen-

tencing Commission (in this section, referred
to as the ‘‘Commission’’) shall promulgate
the guidelines or amendments provided for
under section 8605(e) of the SAFER SKIES
Act (title LXXXVI of Public Law 119–60) as
soon as possible after the date of enactment
of such Act, and in any event not later than
December 31, 2026, notwithstanding the deadline under section 994(p) of title 28, United
States Code.
(b) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments to
the guidelines promulgated under subsection
(a) shall take effect 180 days after the date of
promulgation by the Commission, except to
the extent that the effective date is revised
or the amendment is otherwise modified or
disapproved by an Act of Congress, and shall
supersede any amendment to the contrary
contained in the amendments to the sentencing guidelines submitted to Congress by
the Commission on or about May 1, 2026.
(c) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—The requirements of this section shall supersede the
timeline set forth in section 8605(e)(1) of the
SAFER SKIES Act (title LXXXVI of Public
Law 119–60).
SEC. 5018. BANKRUPTCY FEES.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 126 of the Con-

tinuing Appropriations Act, 2026 (division A
of the Continuing Appropriations, Agriculture, Legislative Branch, Military Construction and Veterans Affairs, and Extensions Act, 2026 (Public Law 119–37; 139 Stat.
502)) is amended to read as follows:
‘‘SEC. 126. Notwithstanding section 106,
during the period ending on the last day of
the first calendar quarter of 2026, section
1930(a)(6)(B)(i) of title 28, United States Code,
shall be applied as if ‘During the 5-year period’ were struck.’’.
(b) APPLICATION OF AMENDMENTS MADE BY
THE BANKRUPTCY ADMINISTRATION IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2025.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 6(b)(2)(A) of the
Bankruptcy Administration Improvement
Act of 2025 is amended by striking ‘‘on the’’
and inserting ‘‘on or after the’’.
(2) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendment
made by paragraph (1) shall take effect as
though enacted immediately after the enactment of the Bankruptcy Administration Improvement Act of 2025.
SEC. 5019. EXTENSION OF AFRICAN GROWTH AND
OPPORTUNITY ACT.
(a) EXTENSION OF PREFERENTIAL TREATMENT FOR CERTAIN COUNTRIES IN AFRICA
UNDER AFRICAN GROWTH AND OPPORTUNITY
ACT; RETROACTIVE APPLICATION.—
(1) EXTENSION.—
(A) TRADE ACT OF 1974.—Section 506B of the

Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2466b) is amended
by striking ‘‘September 30, 2025’’ and inserting ‘‘December 31, 2026’’.
(B) AFRICAN GROWTH AND OPPORTUNITY
ACT.—
(i) IN GENERAL.—Section 112(g) of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (19 U.S.C.

PO 00000

Frm 00094

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

3721(g)) is amended by striking ‘‘September
30, 2025’’ and inserting ‘‘December 31, 2026’’.
(ii) REGIONAL APPAREL ARTICLE PROGRAM.—
Section 112(b)(3)(A) of the African Growth
and Opportunity Act (19 U.S.C. 3721(b)(3)(A))
is amended—
(I) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘21 succeeding’’ and inserting ‘‘23 succeeding’’; and
(II) in clause (ii)(II), by striking ‘‘September 30, 2025’’ and inserting ‘‘December 31,
2026’’.
(iii) THIRD-COUNTRY FABRIC PROGRAM.—Section 112(c)(1) of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (19 U.S.C. 3721(c)(1)) is amended—
(I) in the paragraph heading, by striking
‘‘SEPTEMBER 30, 2025’’ and inserting ‘‘DECEMBER 31, 2026’’;
(II) in subparagraph (A), by striking ‘‘September 30, 2025’’ and inserting ‘‘December 31,
2026’’; and
(III) in subparagraph (B)(ii), by striking
‘‘September 30, 2025’’ and inserting ‘‘December 31, 2026’’.
(2) RETROACTIVE APPLICATION.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Notwithstanding section
514 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 U.S.C. 1514) or
any other provision of law, and subject to
subparagraph (B), any entry of a covered article to which duty-free treatment or other
preferential treatment under section 506A of
the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2466a) or section 112 of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (19 U.S.C. 3721) would have applied if the entry had been made on September 30, 2025, that was made—
(i) after September 30, 2025, and
(ii) before the date of the enactment of this
Act,
shall be liquidated or reliquidated as though
such entry occurred on the date of the enactment of this Act.
(B) REQUESTS.—A liquidation or reliquidation may be made under subparagraph (A)
with respect to an entry only if a request
therefor is filed with the Commissioner of
U.S. Customs and Border Protection not
later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act that contains sufficient
information to enable such Commissioner—
(i) to locate the entry; or
(ii) to reconstruct the entry if it cannot be
located.
(C) PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS OWED.—Any
amounts owed by the United States pursuant
to the liquidation or reliquidation of an
entry of a covered article under subparagraph (A) shall be paid, without interest of
any kind, not later than 90 days after the
date of the liquidation or reliquidation (as
the case may be).
(D) DEFINITIONS.—In this paragraph:
(i) COVERED ARTICLE.—The term ‘‘covered
article’’ means an article from a country
that is designated by the President as a beneficiary sub-Saharan African country under
section 104 of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (19 U.S.C. 3703) as of the day before the date of the enactment of this Act.
(ii) ENTRY.—The term ‘‘entry’’ includes a
withdrawal from warehouse for consumption.
(b) EXTENSION OF CUSTOMS USER FEES.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 13031(j)(3) of the
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act of 1985 (19 U.S.C. 58c(j)(3)) is amended—
(A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ‘‘September 30, 2031’’ and inserting ‘‘December 31,
2031’’; and
(B) in subparagraph (B)(i), by striking
‘‘September 30, 2031’’ and inserting ‘‘December 31, 2031’’.
(2) RATE FOR MERCHANDISE PROCESSING
FEES.—Section 503 of the United StatesKorea Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act (Public Law 112–41;19 U.S.C. 3805
note) is amended by striking ‘‘September 30,
2031’’ and inserting ‘‘December 31, 2031’’.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(a) EXTENSION OF SPECIAL RULES FOR HAITI
UNDER CARIBBEAN BASIN ECONOMIC RECOVERY
ACT.—Section 213A of the Caribbean Basin
Economic Recovery Act (19 U.S.C. 2703a) is
amended—
(1) in subsection (b)—
(A) in paragraph (1)—
(i) by amending subparagraph (B)(v)(I) to
read as follows:
‘‘(I) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE.—The term
‘applicable percentage’ means 60 percent or
more on and after December 20, 2017.’’; and
(ii) by amending subparagraph (C) to read
as follows:
‘‘(C) QUANTITATIVE LIMITATIONS.—The preferential treatment described in subparagraph (A) shall be extended, during each period after the initial applicable 1-year period, to not more than 1.25 percent of the aggregate square meter equivalents of all apparel articles imported into the United
States in the most recent 12-month period
for which data are available.’’; and
(B) in paragraph (2), by striking ‘‘in each of
the 16 succeeding 1-year periods’’ each place
it appears and inserting ‘‘in any of the succeeding 1-year periods’’; and
(2) by amending subsection (h) to read as
follows:
‘‘(h) TERMINATION.—The duty-free treatment provided under this section shall remain in effect until December 31, 2026.’’.
(b) RESTORATION OF ELIGIBILITY OF CERTAIN
ARTICLES FOR PREFERENTIAL TREATMENT.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The President shall proclaim such modifications to the Harmonized
Tariff Schedule of the United States as may
be necessary to restore the eligibility of articles described in paragraph (2) for preferential treatment under section 213A of the
Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act (19
U.S.C. 2703a).
(2) ARTICLES DESCRIBED.—An article described in this paragraph is an article that—
(A) was eligible for preferential treatment
under section 213A of the Caribbean Basin
Economic Recovery Act (19 U.S.C. 2703a) on
December 20, 2006; and
(B) became ineligible for such treatment
after that date and before the date of the enactment of this Act as a result of revisions
to the Harmonized Tariff Schedule.
(3) EFFECTIVE DATE OF PROCLAMATION.—A
proclamation under paragraph (1) shall take
effect not earlier than 2 business days after
the President submits to the Committee on
Finance of the Senate and the Committee on
Ways and Means of the House of Representatives a report on the proclamation and the
reasons for the modifications to the Harmonized Tariff Schedule under the proclamation.
(c) RETROACTIVE APPLICATION.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Notwithstanding section
514 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 U.S.C. 1514) or
any other provision of law, and subject to
paragraph (2), any entry of a covered article
to which duty-free treatment or other preferential treatment under the Caribbean
Basin Economic Recovery Act (19 U.S.C. 2701
et seq.) would have applied if the entry had
been made before September 30, 2025, that
was made—
(A) on or after September 30, 2025, and
(B) before the date of the enactment of this
Act,
shall be liquidated or reliquidated as though
such entry occurred on the date of the enactment of this Act.
(2) REQUESTS.—A liquidation or reliquidation may be made under paragraph (1) with
respect to an entry only if a request therefor
is filed with the Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection not later than
180 days after the date of the enactment of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1269

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

SEC. 5020. EXTENSION OF HAITI ECONOMIC LIFT
PROGRAM.

Jkt 069060

this Act that contains sufficient information
to enable such Commissioner—
(A) to locate the entry; or
(B) to reconstruct the entry if it cannot be
located.
(3) PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS OWED.—Any
amounts owed by the United States pursuant
to the liquidation or reliquidation of an
entry of a covered article under paragraph
(1) shall be paid, without interest of any
kind, not later than 90 days after the date of
the liquidation or reliquidation (as the case
may be).
(4) DEFINITIONS.—In this subsection:
(A) COVERED ARTICLE.—The term ‘‘covered
article’’ means an article from Haiti.
(B) ENTRY.—The term ‘‘entry’’ includes a
withdrawal from warehouse for consumption.
SEC. 5021. BUDGETARY EFFECTS.
(a) STATUTORY PAYGO SCORECARDS.—The

budgetary effects of this division and each
succeeding division shall not be entered on
either PAYGO scorecard maintained pursuant to section 4(d) of the Statutory Pay-AsYou-Go Act of 2010.
(b) SENATE PAYGO SCORECARDS.—The
budgetary effects of this division and each
succeeding division shall not be entered on
any PAYGO scorecard maintained for purposes of section 4106 of H. Con. Res. 71 (115th
Congress).
(c) CLASSIFICATION OF BUDGETARY EFFECTS.—Notwithstanding Rule 3 of the Budget Scorekeeping Guidelines set forth in the
joint explanatory statement of the committee of conference accompanying Conference Report 105–217 and section 250(c)(8) of
the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit
Control Act of 1985, the budgetary effects of
this division and each succeeding division
shall not be estimated—
(1) for purposes of section 251 of such Act;
(2) for purposes of an allocation to the
Committee on Appropriations pursuant to
section 302(a) of the Congressional Budget
Act of 1974; and
(3) for purposes of paragraph (4)(C) of section 3 of the Statutory Pay-As-You-Go Act
of 2010 as being included in an appropriation
Act.
DIVISION F—HEALTH CARE EXTENDERS
SEC. 6001. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

The table of contents of this division is as
follows:
DIVISION F—HEALTH CARE EXTENDERS
Sec. 6001. Table of contents.
TITLE I—MEDICAID
Sec. 6101. Streamlined enrollment process
for eligible out-of-State providers under Medicaid and
CHIP.
Sec. 6102. Removing certain age restrictions
on Medicaid eligibility for
working adults with disabilities.
Sec. 6103. Medicaid State plan requirement
for determining residency and
coverage for military families.
Sec. 6104. State studies and HHS report on
costs of providing maternity,
labor, and delivery services.
Sec. 6105. Modifying
certain
disproportionate share hospital allotments.
Sec. 6106. Modifying certain limitations on
disproportionate share hospital
payment adjustments under the
Medicaid program.
TITLE II—MEDICARE
Sec. 6201. Extension of increased inpatient
hospital payment adjustment
for certain low-volume hospitals.
Sec. 6202. Extension of the Medicare-dependent hospital (MDH) program.

PO 00000

Frm 00095

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0655

Sec. 6203. Extension of add-on payments for
ambulance services.
Sec. 6204. Extending incentive payments for
participation in eligible alternative payment models.
Sec. 6205. Extension of funding for quality
measure endorsement, input,
and selection.
Sec. 6206. Extension of funding outreach and
assistance for low-income programs.
Sec. 6207. Extension of funding for Medicare
hospice surveys.
Sec. 6208. Extension of the work geographic
index floor.
Sec. 6209. Extension of certain telehealth
flexibilities.
Sec. 6210. Extending acute hospital care at
home waiver flexibilities.
Sec. 6211. In-home cardiopulmonary rehabilitation flexibility.
Sec. 6212. Enhancing certain program integrity requirements for DME
under Medicare.
Sec. 6213. Guidance on furnishing services
via telehealth to individuals
with
limited
English
proficiency.
Sec. 6214. Inclusion of virtual diabetes prevention program suppliers in
MDPP Expanded Model.
Sec. 6215. Medication-induced
movement
disorder outreach and education.
Sec. 6216. Report on wearable medical devices.
Sec. 6217. Extension of temporary inclusion
of authorized oral antiviral
drugs as covered part D drugs.
Sec. 6218. Extension of adjustment to calculation of hospice cap amount
under Medicare.
Sec. 6219. Adjustments to Medicare part D
cost-sharing reductions for lowincome individuals.
Sec. 6220. Requiring Enhanced and Accurate
Lists of (REAL) Health Providers Act.
Sec. 6221. Medicare coverage of multi-cancer
early detection screening tests.
Sec. 6222. Medicare coverage of external infusion pumps and non-self-administrable
home
infusion
drugs.
Sec. 6223. Assuring pharmacy access and
choice for medicare beneficiaries.
Sec. 6224. Modernizing and ensuring PBM accountability.
Sec. 6225. Requiring a separate identification number and an attestation
for each off-campus outpatient
department of a provider.
Sec. 6226. Revising phase-in of medicare
clinical laboratory test payment changes.
Sec. 6227. Medicare sequestration.
Sec. 6228. Medicare Improvement Fund.
TITLE III—HUMAN SERVICES
Sec. 6301. Sexual risk avoidance education
extension.
Sec. 6302. Personal responsibility education
extension.
Sec. 6303. Extension of funding for familyto-family health information
centers.
Sec. 6304. Extension of the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Program.
TITLE IV—PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER
EXTENDERS
Subtitle A—Extensions
Sec. 6401. Extension for community health
centers, National Health Service Corps, and teaching health
centers that operate GME programs.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1270

Sec. 6402. Extension of special diabetes programs.
Sec. 6403. Extension of national health security programs.
Sec. 6404. No Surprises Act implementation.
Subtitle B—World Trade Center Health
Program
Sec. 6411. 9/11 responder and survivor health
funding corrections.
TITLE V—PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS
Sec. 6501. Preventing maternal deaths.
Sec. 6502. Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network.
Sec. 6503. Honor our living donors.
Sec. 6504. Program for pediatric studies of
drugs.
Sec. 6505. Sickle cell disease prevention and
treatment.
Sec. 6506. Lifespan respite care.
Sec. 6507. PREEMIE.
Sec. 6508. Dr. Lorna Breen health care provider protection.
TITLE VI—FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION
Subtitle A—Mikaela Naylon Give Kids a
Chance Act
Sec. 6601. Research into pediatric uses of
drugs; additional authorities of
Food and Drug Administration
regarding molecularly targeted
cancer drugs.
Sec. 6602. Ensuring completion of pediatric
study requirements.
Sec. 6603. FDA report on PREA enforcement.
Sec. 6604. Extension of authority to issue
priority review vouchers to encourage treatments for rare pediatric diseases.
Sec. 6605. Limitations on exclusive approval
or licensure of orphan drugs.
Subtitle B—United States-Abraham Accords
Cooperation and Security
Sec. 6611. Establishment of Abraham Accords Office within Food and
Drug Administration.
TITLE VII—LOWERING PRESCRIPTION
DRUG COSTS
Sec. 6701. Oversight of pharmacy benefit
management services.
Sec. 6702. Full rebate pass through to plan;
exception for innocent plan fiduciaries.
Sec. 6703. Increasing transparency in generic
drug applications.
TITLE I—MEDICAID

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SEC. 6101. STREAMLINED ENROLLMENT PROCESS
FOR ELIGIBLE OUT-OF-STATE PROVIDERS UNDER MEDICAID AND
CHIP.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1902(kk) of the

Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(kk)) is
amended by adding at the end the following
new paragraph:
‘‘(10) STREAMLINED ENROLLMENT PROCESS
FOR ELIGIBLE OUT-OF-STATE PROVIDERS.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—The State—
‘‘(i) adopts and implements a process to
allow an eligible out-of-State provider to enroll under the State plan (or a waiver of such
plan) to furnish items and services to, or
order, prescribe, refer, or certify eligibility
for items and services for, qualifying individuals without the imposition of screening or
enrollment requirements by such State that
exceed the minimum necessary for such
State to provide payment to an eligible outof-State provider under such State plan (or a
waiver of such plan), such as the provider’s
name and National Provider Identifier (and
such other information specified by the Secretary); and
‘‘(ii) provides that an eligible out-of-State
provider that enrolls as a participating provider in the State plan (or a waiver of such

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

plan) through such process shall be so enrolled for a 5-year period, unless the provider
is terminated or excluded from participation
during such period.
‘‘(B) DEFINITIONS.—In this paragraph:
‘‘(i) ELIGIBLE OUT-OF-STATE PROVIDER.—The
term ‘eligible out-of-State provider’ means,
with respect to a State, a provider—
‘‘(I) that is located in any other State;
‘‘(II) that—
‘‘(aa) was determined by the Secretary to
have a limited risk of fraud, waste, and
abuse for purposes of determining the level
of screening to be conducted under section
1866(j)(2), has been so screened under such
section 1866(j)(2), and is enrolled in the Medicare program under title XVIII; or
‘‘(bb) was determined by the State agency
administering or supervising the administration of the State plan (or a waiver of such
plan) of such other State to have a limited
risk of fraud, waste, and abuse for purposes
of determining the level of screening to be
conducted under paragraph (1) of this subsection, has been so screened under such
paragraph (1), and is enrolled under such
State plan (or a waiver of such plan); and
‘‘(III) that has not been—
‘‘(aa) excluded from participation in any
Federal health care program pursuant to section 1128 or 1128A;
‘‘(bb) excluded from participation in the
State plan (or a waiver of such plan) pursuant to part 1002 of title 42, Code of Federal
Regulations (or any successor regulation), or
State law; or
‘‘(cc) terminated from participating in a
Federal health care program or the State
plan (or a waiver of such plan) for a reason
described in paragraph (8)(A).
‘‘(ii) QUALIFYING INDIVIDUAL.—The term
‘qualifying individual’ means an individual
under 21 years of age who is enrolled under
the State plan (or waiver of such plan).
‘‘(iii) STATE.—The term ‘State’ means 1 of
the 50 States or the District of Columbia.’’.
(b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.—
(1) Section 1902(a)(77) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(77)) is amended by
inserting ‘‘enrollment,’’ after ‘‘screening,’’.
(2) The subsection heading for section
1902(kk) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(kk)) is
amended by inserting ‘‘enrollment,’’ after
‘‘screening,’’.
(3) Section 2107(e)(1)(G) of such Act (42
U.S.C. 1397gg(e)(1)(G)) is amended by inserting ‘‘enrollment,’’ after ‘‘screening,’’.
(c) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments
made by this section shall take effect on the
date that is 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 6102. REMOVING CERTAIN AGE RESTRICTIONS ON MEDICAID ELIGIBILITY
FOR WORKING ADULTS WITH DISABILITIES.
(a) MODIFICATION OF OPTIONAL BUY-IN
GROUPS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)

of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.
1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)) is amended—
(A) in subclause (XV)—
(i) by striking ‘‘, but less than 65,’’; and
(ii) by inserting ‘‘, including at least the
group described in section 1905(a)(xviii)’’ before the semicolon at the end; and
(B) in subclause (XVI), by inserting ‘‘including at least the group described in section 1905(a)(xii),’’ after ‘‘the State may establish,’’.
(2) INDIVIDUALS DESCRIBED.—Section 1905(a)
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a))
is amended—
(A) in clause (xvi), by striking ‘‘or’’ at the
end;
(B) in clause (xvii), by adding ‘‘or’’ after
the comma at the end; and
(C) by adding after clause (xvii) the following new clause:

PO 00000

Frm 00096

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

‘‘(xviii) individuals who, but for earnings
in excess of the limit established under subsection (q)(2)(B), would be considered to be
receiving supplemental security income, and
who are at least 16 years of age,’’.
MODIFICATION.—Section
(3)
DEFINITION
1905(v)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1396d(v)(1)(A)) is amended by striking
‘‘, but less than 65,’’.
(b) APPLICATION TO CERTAIN STATES.—A
State that, as of the date of enactment of
this Act, provides for making medical assistance available to individuals described in
subclause
(XV)
or
(XVI)
of
section
1902(a)(10)(A)(ii) of the Social Security Act
(42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)) shall not be regarded as failing to comply with the requirements of the amendments made by subsection (a) before January 1, 2028.
SEC. 6103. MEDICAID STATE PLAN REQUIREMENT
FOR DETERMINING RESIDENCY AND
COVERAGE FOR MILITARY FAMILIES.

(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1902 of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a) is amended—
(1) in subsection (a)—
(A) in paragraph (88), by striking ‘‘and’’ at
the end;
(B) in paragraph (89), by striking the period at the end and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(C) by inserting after paragraph (89), the
following new paragraph:
‘‘(90) beginning January 1, 2030, provide,
with respect to an active duty relocated individual (as defined in subsection (yy)(1))—
‘‘(A) that, for purposes of determining eligibility for medical assistance under the
State plan (or waiver of such plan), such active duty relocated individual is treated as a
resident of the State unless such individual
voluntarily elects not to be so treated for
such purposes;
‘‘(B) that if, at the time of relocation (as
described in subsection (yy)(1)), such active
duty relocated individual is on a home and
community-based services waiting list (as
defined in subsection (yy)(2)), such individual remains on such list until—
‘‘(i) the State completes an assessment and
renders a decision with respect to the eligibility of such individual to receive the relevant home and community-based services
at the time a slot for such services becomes
available and, in the case such decision is a
denial of such eligibility, such individual has
exhausted the individual’s opportunity for a
fair hearing; or
‘‘(ii) such individual elects to be removed
from such list; and
‘‘(C) payment for medical assistance furnished under the State plan (or a waiver of
the plan) on behalf of such active duty relocated individual in the military service relocation State (as referred to in subsection
(yy)(1)(B)(i)), to the extent that such assistance is available in such military service relocation State in accordance with such guidance as the Secretary may issue to ensure
access to such assistance.’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following new
subsection:
‘‘(yy) ACTIVE DUTY RELOCATED INDIVIDUAL;
HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES WAITING LIST.—For purposes of subsection (a)(90)
and this subsection:
‘‘(1) ACTIVE DUTY RELOCATED INDIVIDUAL.—
The term ‘active duty relocated individual’
means an individual—
‘‘(A) who—
‘‘(i) is enrolled under the State plan (or
waiver of such plan); or
‘‘(ii) with respect to an individual described in subparagraph (C)(ii), would be so
enrolled
pursuant
to
subsection
(a)(10)(A)(ii)(VI) if such individual began receiving home and community-based services;
‘‘(B) who—

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

‘‘(i) is a member of the Armed Forces engaged in active duty service and is relocated
to another State (in this subsection referred
to as the ‘military service relocation State’)
by reason of such service;
‘‘(ii) would be described in clause (i) except
that the individual stopped being engaged in
active duty service (including by reason of
retirement from such service) and the last
day on which the individual was engaged in
active duty service occurred not more than
12 months ago; or
‘‘(iii) is a dependent (as defined by the Secretary) of a member described in clause (i) or
(ii) who relocates to the military service relocation State with such member; and
‘‘(C) who—
‘‘(i) was receiving home and communitybased services (as defined in section
9817(a)(2)(B) of the American Rescue Plan
Act of 2021) at the time of such relocation; or
‘‘(ii) if the State maintains a home and
community-based services waiting list, was
on such home and community-based services
waiting list at the time of such relocation.
‘‘(2) HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES
WAITING LIST.—The term ‘home and community-based services waiting list’ means, in
the case of a State that has a limit on the
number of individuals who may receive home
and community-based services under section
1115(a) or section 1915(c), a list maintained
by such State of individuals who are requesting to receive such services under 1 or more
such sections but for whom the State has not
yet completed an assessment and rendered a
decision with respect to the eligibility of
such individuals to receive the relevant
home and community-based services at the
time a slot for such services becomes available due to such limit.’’.
(b) IMPLEMENTATION FUNDING.—There are
appropriated, out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise obligated, $1,000,000 for
each of fiscal years 2026 through 2030, to remain available until expended, to the Secretary of Health and Human Services for
purposes of implementing the amendments
made by subsection (a).

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SEC. 6104. STATE STUDIES AND HHS REPORT ON
COSTS OF PROVIDING MATERNITY,
LABOR, AND DELIVERY SERVICES.
(a) STATE STUDY.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 30 months

after the date of enactment of this Act, and
every 5 years thereafter, each State (as such
term is defined in section 1101(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301(a)(1)) for
purposes of titles XIX and XXI of such Act)
shall conduct a study on the costs of providing maternity, labor, and delivery services in applicable hospitals (as defined in
paragraph (3)) and submit the results of such
study to the Secretary of Health and Human
Services (referred to in this section as the
‘‘Secretary’’) in such form and manner as the
Secretary requires.
(2) CONTENT OF STUDY.—A State study required under paragraph (1) shall include the
following information (to the extent practicable and as further defined by the Secretary) with respect to maternity, labor, and
delivery services furnished by applicable hospitals located in the State:
(A) An estimate of the cost of providing
maternity, labor, and delivery services at applicable hospitals, based on the expenditures
a representative sample of such hospitals incurred for providing such services during the
2 most recent years for which data is available.
(B) An estimate of the cost of providing
maternity, labor, and delivery services at
hospitals that would be applicable hospitals
(as defined in paragraph (3)) if not for ceasing to provide labor and delivery services
within the past 5 years, based on the expenditures a representative sample of such hos-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1271

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

pitals incurred for providing such services
during the 2 most recent years for which
data is available.
(C) To the extent data allow, an analysis of
the extent to which geographic location,
community demographics, and local economic factors (as defined by the Secretary)
affect the cost of providing maternity, labor,
and delivery services at applicable hospitals
described in subparagraphs (A) and (B), including the cost of services that support the
provision of maternity, labor, and delivery
services.
(D) The amounts applicable hospitals are
paid for maternity, labor, and delivery services, by geographic location and hospital
size, under—
(i) parts A and B of the Medicare program;
(ii) the State Medicaid program, including
payment amounts for such services under
fee-for-service payment arrangements and
under managed care (as applicable);
(iii) the State CHIP plan, including payment amounts for such services under feefor-service payment arrangements and under
managed care (as applicable); and
(iv) private health insurance.
(E) A comparative payment rate analysis—
(i) comparing payment rates for maternity,
labor, and delivery services (inclusive of all
payments received by applicable hospitals
for furnishing maternity, labor, and delivery
services) under the State Medicaid fee-forservice program to such payment rates for
such services under Medicare (including
those described in paragraphs (2) and (3) of
section 447.203(b) of title 42, Code of Federal
Regulations), and, to the extent data is
available, such payment rates for such services under Medicaid managed care and private health insurers within geographic areas
of the State; and
(ii) analyzing different payment methods
for such services, such as the use of bundled
payments, quality incentives, and low-volume adjustments.
(F) An evaluation, using such methodology
and parameters established by the Secretary,
of whether each hospital located in the State
that furnishes maternity, labor, and delivery
services is expected to experience in the next
3 years significant changes in particular expenditures or types of reimbursement for
maternity, labor, and delivery services.
(3) APPLICABLE HOSPITAL DEFINED.—For
purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘applicable hospital’’ means any hospital located
in a State that meets either of the following
criteria:
(A) The hospital provides labor and delivery services and more than 50 percent of the
hospital’s births (in the most recent year for
which such data is available) are financed by
the Medicaid program or CHIP.
(B) The hospital—
(i) is located in a rural area (as defined by
the Federal Office of Rural Health Policy for
the purpose of rural health grant programs
administered by such Office);
(ii) based on the most recent 2 years of
data available (as determined by the Secretary), furnished services for less than an
average of 300 births per year; and
(iii) provides labor and delivery services.
(4) ASSISTANCE TO SMALL HOSPITALS IN COMPILING COST INFORMATION.—There are appropriated to the Secretary for fiscal year 2026,
$10,000,000 for the purpose of providing grants
and technical assistance to a hospital described in paragraph (3)(B) to enable such
hospital to compile detailed information for
use in the State studies required under paragraph (1), to remain available until expended.
(5) HHS REPORT ON STATE STUDIES.—For
each year in which a State is required to
conduct a study under paragraph (1), the
Secretary shall issue, not later than 18

PO 00000

Frm 00097

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

months after the date on which the State
submits to the Secretary the data described
in such paragraph, a publicly available report that compiles and details the results of
such study and includes the information described in paragraph (2).
(b) HHS REPORT ON NATIONAL DATA COLLECTION FINDINGS.—Not later than 3 years
and 6 months after the date of enactment of
this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress, and make publicly available, a report
analyzing the first studies conducted by
States under subsection (a)(1), including recommendations for improving data collection
on the cost of providing maternity, labor,
and delivery services.
(c) IMPLEMENTATION FUNDING.—In addition
to the amount appropriated under subsection
(a)(4), there are appropriated, out of any
funds in the Treasury not otherwise obligated, $3,000,000 for fiscal year 2026, to remain available until expended, to the Secretary of Health and Human Services for
purposes of implementing this section.
SEC.

(a)

6105.

MODIFYING CERTAIN DISPROPORTIONATE SHARE HOSPITAL ALLOTMENTS.
EXTENDING TENNESSEE DSH ALLOT-

MENTS.—Section 1923(f)(6)(A)(vi) of the Social

Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r–4(f)(6)(A)(vi)) is
amended—
(1) in the heading, by striking ‘‘2025 AND A
PORTION OF FISCAL YEAR 2026’’ and inserting
2027
’’; and
‘‘
(2) by inserting ‘‘, and the DSH allotment
for Tennessee for the portion of fiscal year
2026 beginning on January 31, 2026, and ending September 30, 2026, shall be $35,351,507,
which may be claimed as fiscal year 2026 uncompensated care costs, and the DSH allotment for Tennessee for fiscal year 2027, shall
be $53,100,000’’ before the period.
(b) ELIMINATING CERTAIN DSH ALLOTMENT
REDUCTIONS.—Section 1923(f)(7)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r–4(f)(7)(A)) is
amended—
(1) in clause (i)—
(A) in the matter preceding subclause (I),
by striking ‘‘the period beginning January
31, 2026, and ending September 30, 2026, and
for each of fiscal years 2027 and 2028’’ and inserting ‘‘fiscal year 2028’’;
(B) in subclause (I), by striking ‘‘or period’’; and
(C) in subclause (II), by striking ‘‘or period’’ each place it appears; and
(2) in clause (ii), by striking ‘‘the period
beginning January 31, 2026, and ending September 30, 2026, and for each of fiscal years
2027 and 2028’’ and inserting ‘‘fiscal year
2028’’.
SEC. 6106. MODIFYING CERTAIN LIMITATIONS ON
DISPROPORTIONATE SHARE HOSPITAL
PAYMENT
ADJUSTMENTS
UNDER THE MEDICAID PROGRAM.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1923(g) of the So-

cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r–4(g)) is
amended—
(1) in paragraph (1)—
(A) in subparagraph (A)—
(i) in the matter preceding clause (i), by
striking ‘‘(other than a hospital described in
paragraph (2)(B))’’;
(ii) in clause (i), by inserting ‘‘with respect
to such hospital and year’’ after ‘‘described
in subparagraph (B)’’; and
(iii) in clause (ii)—
(I) in subclause (I), by striking ‘‘and’’ at
the end;
(II) in subclause (II), by striking the period
and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(III) by adding at the end the following new
subclause:
‘‘(III) payments made under title XVIII or
by an applicable plan (as defined in section
1862(b)(8)(F)) for such services.’’; and
(B) in subparagraph (B)—
(i) in the matter preceding clause (i), by
striking ‘‘in this clause are’’ and inserting

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1272

‘‘in this subparagraph are, with respect to a
hospital and a year,’’; and
(ii) by adding at the end the following new
clause:
‘‘(iii) Individuals who are eligible for medical assistance under the State plan or under
a waiver of such plan and for whom the State
plan or waiver is a payor for such services
after application of benefits under title
XVIII or under an applicable plan (as defined
in section 1862(b)(8)(F)), but only if the hospital has in the aggregate incurred costs exceeding payments under such State plan,
waiver, title XVIII, or applicable plan for
such services furnished to such individuals
during such year.’’;
(2) by striking paragraph (2);
(3) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2); and
(4) in paragraph (2), as so redesignated, by
striking ‘‘Notwithstanding paragraph (2) of
this subsection (as in effect on October 1,
2021), paragraph (2)’’ and inserting ‘‘Paragraph (2)’’.
(b) EFFECTIVE DATE.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in
paragraph (2), the amendments made by this
section shall apply to payment adjustments
made under section 1923 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r–4) for Medicaid
State plan rate years beginning on or after
the date of enactment of this Act.
(2) STATE OPTION TO DISTRIBUTE UNSPENT
DSH ALLOTMENTS FROM PRIOR YEARS UP TO
MODIFIED CAP.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—If, for any Medicaid State

plan rate year that begins on or after October 1, 2022, and before the date of enactment
of this Act, a State did not spend the full
amount of its Federal fiscal year allotment
under section 1923 of the Social Security Act
(42 U.S.C. 1396r–4) applicable to that State
plan rate year, the State may use the
unspent portion of such allotment to increase the amount of any payment adjustment made to a hospital for such rate year,
provided that—
(i) such payment adjustment (as so increased) is consistent with subsection (g) of
such section (as amended by this section);
and
(ii) the total amount of all payment adjustments for the State plan rate year (as so
increased) does not exceed the disproportionate share hospital allotment for the
State and applicable Federal fiscal year
under subsection (f) of such section.
(B) NO RECOUPMENT OF PAYMENTS ALREADY
MADE TO HOSPITALS.—A State shall not recoup any payment adjustment made by the
State to a hospital for a Medicaid State plan
rate year described in subparagraph (A) if
such payment adjustment is consistent with
section 1923(g) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r–
4(g)) as in effect on October 1, 2021.
(C) AUTHORITY TO PERMIT RETROACTIVE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

MODIFICATION OF STATE PLAN AMENDMENTS TO
ALLOW FOR INCREASES.—
(i) IN GENERAL.—Subject to clause (ii), sole-

ly for the purpose of allowing a State to increase the amount of a payment adjustment
to a hospital for a Medicaid State plan rate
year described in subparagraph (A) pursuant
to this paragraph, a State may retroactively
modify a provision of the Medicaid State
plan, a waiver of such plan, or a State plan
amendment that relates to such rate year
and the Secretary may approve such modification.
(ii) DEADLINE.—A State may not submit a
request for approval of a retroactive modification to a provision of the Medicaid State
plan, a waiver of such plan, or a State plan
amendment for a Medicaid State plan rate
year after the date by which the State is required to submit the independent certified
audit for such State plan rate year as re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

quired under section 1923(j)(2) of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r–4(j)(2)).
(D) REPORTING.—If a State increases a payment adjustment made to a hospital for a
Medicaid State plan rate year pursuant to
this paragraph, the State shall include information in such form and manner as the Secretary shall specify on such increased payment adjustment as part of the annual report submitted by the State under section
1923(j)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.
1396r–4(j)(1)) for such State plan rate year or,
if necessary, as determined by the Secretary,
in an amendment to such annual report.
TITLE II—MEDICARE
SEC. 6201. EXTENSION OF INCREASED INPATIENT
HOSPITAL PAYMENT ADJUSTMENT
FOR CERTAIN LOW-VOLUME HOSPITALS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1886(d)(12) of the

Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(12))
is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ‘‘during the portion of fiscal year 2026 beginning
on January 31, 2026, and ending on September
30, 2026, and in fiscal year 2027’’ and inserting
‘‘during the portion of fiscal year 2027 beginning on January 1, 2027, and ending on September 30, 2027, and in fiscal year 2028’’;
(2) in subparagraph (C)(i)—
(A) in the matter preceding subclause (I),
by striking ‘‘through 2025 and the portion of
fiscal year 2026 beginning on October 1, 2025,
and ending on January 30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘through 2026 and the portion of fiscal
year 2027 beginning on October 1, 2026, and
ending on December 31, 2026’’;
(B) in subclause (III), by striking ‘‘through
2025 and the portion of fiscal year 2026 beginning on October 1, 2025, and ending on January 30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘through 2026 and
the portion of fiscal year 2027 beginning on
October 1, 2026, and ending on December 31,
2026’’; and
(C) in subclause (IV), by striking ‘‘the portion of fiscal year 2026 beginning on January
31, 2026, and ending on September 30, 2026,
and fiscal year 2027’’ and inserting ‘‘the portion of fiscal year 2027 beginning on January
1, 2027, and ending on September 30, 2027, and
fiscal year 2028’’; and
(3) in subparagraph (D)—
(A) in the matter preceding clause (i), by
striking ‘‘through 2025 or during the portion
of fiscal year 2026 beginning on October 1,
2025, and ending on January 30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘through 2026 or during the portion
of fiscal year 2027 beginning on October 1,
2026, and ending on December 31, 2026’’; and
(B) in clause (ii), by striking ‘‘through 2025
and the portion of fiscal year 2026 beginning
on October 1, 2025, and ending on January 30,
2026’’ and inserting ‘‘through 2026 and the
portion of fiscal year 2027 beginning on October 1, 2026, and ending on December 31, 2026’’.
(b)
IMPLEMENTATION.—Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, the Secretary of
Health and Human Services may implement
the amendments made by this section by
program instruction or otherwise.
SEC. 6202. EXTENSION OF THE MEDICARE-DEPENDENT HOSPITAL (MDH) PROGRAM.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1886(d)(5)(G) of

the
Social
Security
Act
(42
U.S.C.
1395ww(d)(5)(G)) is amended—
(1) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘January 31,
2026’’ and inserting ‘‘January 1, 2027’’; and
(2) in clause (ii)(II), by striking ‘‘January
31, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘January 1, 2027’’.
(b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 1886(b)(3)(D) of
the
Social
Security
Act
(42
U.S.C.
1395ww(b)(3)(D)) is amended—
(A) in the matter preceding clause (i), by
striking ‘‘January 31, 2026’’ and inserting
‘‘January 1, 2027’’; and

PO 00000

Frm 00098

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(B) in clause (iv), by striking ‘‘through fiscal year 2025 and the portion of fiscal year
2026 beginning on October 1, 2025, and ending
on January 30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘through
fiscal year 2026 and the portion of fiscal year
2027 beginning on October 1, 2026, and ending
on December 31, 2026’’.
(2) PERMITTING HOSPITALS TO DECLINE RECLASSIFICATION.—Section 13501(e)(2) of the
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993
(42 U.S.C. 1395ww note) is amended by striking ‘‘through fiscal year 2025, or the portion
of fiscal year 2026 beginning on October 1,
2025, and ending on January 30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘through fiscal year 2026, or the portion of fiscal year 2027 beginning on October
1, 2026, and ending on December 31, 2026’’.
SEC. 6203. EXTENSION OF ADD-ON PAYMENTS
FOR AMBULANCE SERVICES.

Section 1834(l) of the Social Security Act
(42 U.S.C. 1395m(l)) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (12)(A), by striking ‘‘January 31, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘January 1, 2028’’;
and
(2) in paragraph (13), by striking ‘‘January
31, 2026’’ each place it appears and inserting
‘‘January 1, 2028’’ in each such place.
SEC. 6204. EXTENDING INCENTIVE PAYMENTS
FOR PARTICIPATION IN ELIGIBLE
ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT MODELS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1833(z) of the So-

cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(z)) is
amended—
(1) in paragraph (1)(A)—
(A) by inserting ‘‘, and during 2028,’’ after
‘‘with 2026’’; and
(B) by inserting ‘‘, or, with respect to 2028,
3.1 percent’’ after ‘‘1.88 percent’’;
(2) in paragraph (2)—
(A) in subparagraph (B)—
(i) in the heading, by inserting ‘‘AND 2028’’
after ‘‘2026’’; and
(ii) in the matter preceding clause (i), by
inserting ‘‘and 2028’’ after ‘‘2026’’;
(B) in subparagraph (C)—
(i) in the heading, by striking ‘‘BEGINNING
IN 2027’’ and inserting ‘‘2027 AND 2029 AND SUBSEQUENT YEARS’’; and
(ii) in the matter preceding clause (i), by
inserting ‘‘and 2029’’ after ‘‘2027’’; and
(C) in subparagraph (D), by striking ‘‘and
2026’’ and inserting ‘‘2026, and 2028’’; and
(3) in paragraph (4)(B), by inserting ‘‘, or,
with respect to 2028, 3.1 percent’’ after ‘‘1.88
percent’’.
(b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.—Section
1848(q)(1)(C)(iii) of the Social Security Act
(42 U.S.C. 1395w–4(q)(1)(C)(iii)) is amended—
(1) in subclause (II), by inserting ‘‘and
2028’’ after ‘‘2026’’; and
(2) in subclause (III), by inserting ‘‘and
2029’’ after ‘‘2027’’.
SEC. 6205. EXTENSION OF FUNDING FOR QUALITY
MEASURE ENDORSEMENT, INPUT,
AND SELECTION.

Section 1890(d)(2) of the Social Security
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395aaa(d)(2)) is amended—
(1) in the first sentence—
(A) by striking ‘‘and $13,300,000’’ and inserting ‘‘$13,300,000’’; and
(B) by inserting the following before the
period at the end: ‘‘, and $15,100,000 for fiscal
year 2027’’; and
(2) in the third sentence, by striking ‘‘and
2026’’ and inserting ‘‘2026, and 2027’’.
SEC. 6206. EXTENSION OF FUNDING OUTREACH
AND ASSISTANCE FOR LOW-INCOME
PROGRAMS.
(a) STATE HEALTH INSURANCE ASSISTANCE
PROGRAMS.—Subsection (a)(1)(B) of section

119 of the Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 (42 U.S.C.
1395b–3 note) is amended—
(1) in clause (xiv), by striking ‘‘and’’ at the
end;
(2) in clause (xv), by striking the period at
the end and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(3) by inserting after clause (xv) the following new clause:

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

‘‘(xvi) for the period beginning on January
31, 2026, and ending on December 31, 2027,
$30,000,000.’’.
(b) AREA AGENCIES ON AGING.—Subsection
(b)(1)(B) of such section 119 is amended—
(1) in clause (xiv), by striking ‘‘and’’ at the
end;
(2) in clause (xv), by striking the period at
the end and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(3) by inserting after clause (xv) the following new clause:
‘‘(xvi) for the period beginning on January
31, 2026, and ending on December 31, 2027,
$30,000,000.’’.
(c) AGING AND DISABILITY RESOURCE CENTERS.—Subsection (c)(1)(B) of such section
119 is amended—
(1) in clause (xiv), by striking ‘‘and’’ at the
end;
(2) in clause (xv), by striking the period at
the end and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(3) by inserting after clause (xv) the following new clause:
‘‘(xvi) for the period beginning on January
31, 2026, and ending on December 31, 2027,
$10,000,000.’’.
(d) COORDINATION OF EFFORTS TO INFORM
OLDER AMERICANS ABOUT BENEFITS AVAILABLE UNDER FEDERAL AND STATE PROGRAMS.—Subsection (d)(2) of such section 119
is amended—
(1) in clause (xiv), by striking ‘‘and’’ at the
end;
(2) in clause (xv), by striking the period at
the end and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(3) by inserting after clause (xv) the following new clause:
‘‘(xvi) for the period beginning on January
31, 2026, and ending on December 31, 2027,
$30,000,000.’’.
SEC. 6207. EXTENSION OF FUNDING FOR MEDICARE HOSPICE SURVEYS.

Section 3(a)(2) of the IMPACT Act of 2014
(Public Law 113–185), as amended by section
6205 of division F of the Continuing Appropriations, Agriculture, Legislative Branch,
Military Construction and Veterans Affairs,
and Extensions Act, 2026 (Public Law 119–37),
is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ‘‘and’’
at the end;
(2) in subparagraph (C), by striking the period at the end and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(3) by adding at the end the following new
subparagraph:
‘‘(D) $4,400,000 for the period beginning on
January 31, 2026, and ending on December 31,
2026, to remain available until expended.’’.
SEC.

6208.

EXTENSION OF THE WORK
GRAPHIC INDEX FLOOR.

GEO-

Section 1848(e)(1)(E) of the Social Security
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–4(e)(1)(E)) is amended by
striking ‘‘January 31, 2026’’ and inserting
‘‘January 1, 2027’’.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SEC. 6209. EXTENSION OF CERTAIN TELEHEALTH
FLEXIBILITIES.
(a) REMOVING GEOGRAPHIC REQUIREMENTS
AND EXPANDING ORIGINATING SITES FOR TELEHEALTH SERVICES.—Section 1834(m) of the So-

cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(m)) is
amended—
(1) in paragraph (2)(B)(iii), by striking
‘‘ending January 30, 2026’’ and inserting
‘‘ending December 31, 2027’’; and
(2) in paragraph (4)(C)(iii), by striking
‘‘ending on January 30, 2026’’ and inserting
‘‘ending on December 31, 2027’’.
(b) EXPANDING PRACTITIONERS ELIGIBLE TO
FURNISH TELEHEALTH SERVICES.—Section
1834(m)(4)(E) of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1395m(m)(4)(E)) is amended by striking ‘‘ending on January 30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘ending on December 31, 2027’’.
(c) EXTENDING TELEHEALTH SERVICES FOR
FEDERALLY QUALIFIED HEALTH CENTERS AND
HEALTH
CLINICS.—Section
RURAL
1834(m)(8)(A) of the Social Security Act (42

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1273

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

U.S.C. 1395m(m)(8)(A)) is amended by striking ‘‘ending on January 30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘ending on December 31, 2027’’.
(d) DELAYING THE IN-PERSON REQUIREMENTS
UNDER MEDICARE FOR MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES FURNISHED THROUGH TELEHEALTH AND
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY.—
(1) DELAY IN REQUIREMENTS FOR MENTAL
HEALTH SERVICES FURNISHED THROUGH TELEHEALTH.—Section 1834(m)(7)(B)(i) of the Social
Security
Act
(42
U.S.C.
1395m(m)(7)(B)(i)) is amended, in the matter
preceding subclause (I), by striking ‘‘on or
after January 31, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘on or
after January 1, 2028’’.
(2) MENTAL HEALTH VISITS FURNISHED BY
RURAL HEALTH CLINICS.—Section 1834(y)(2) of
the
Social
Security
Act
(42
U.S.C.
1395m(y)(2)) is amended by striking ‘‘January
31, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘January 1, 2028’’.
(3) MENTAL HEALTH VISITS FURNISHED BY
FEDERALLY QUALIFIED HEALTH CENTERS.—Section 1834(o)(4)(B) of the Social Security Act
(42 U.S.C. 1395m(o)(4)(B)) is amended by
striking ‘‘January 31, 2026’’ and inserting
‘‘January 1, 2028’’.
(e) ALLOWING FOR THE FURNISHING OF
AUDIO-ONLY TELEHEALTH SERVICES.—Section
1834(m)(9) of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1395m(m)(9)) is amended by striking
‘‘ending on January 30, 2026’’ and inserting
‘‘ending on December 31, 2027’’.
(f) EXTENDING USE OF TELEHEALTH TO CONDUCT FACE-TO-FACE ENCOUNTER PRIOR TO RECERTIFICATION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR HOSPICE
CARE.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 1814(a)(7)(D)(i)(II)
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.
1395f(a)(7)(D)(i)(II)) is amended—
(A) by striking ‘‘ending on January 30,
2026’’ and inserting ‘‘ending on December 31,
2027’’; and
(B) by inserting ‘‘, except that this subclause shall not apply in the case of such an
encounter with an individual occurring on or
after January 31, 2026, if such individual is
located in an area that is subject to a moratorium on the enrollment of hospice programs under this title pursuant to section
1866(j)(7), if such individual is receiving hospice care from a provider that is subject to
enhanced oversight under this title pursuant
to section 1866(j)(3), or if such encounter is
performed by a hospice physician or nurse
practitioner who is not enrolled under section 1866(j) and is not an opt-out physician or
practitioner
(as
defined
in
section
1802(b)(6)(D))’’ before the semicolon.
(2) REQUIRING USE OF MODIFIER.—Section
1814(a)(7)(D)(i)(II) of the Social Security Act
(42 U.S.C. 1395f(a)(7)(D)(i)(II)), as amended by
paragraph (1), is further amended by inserting ‘‘, but only if, in the case of such an encounter occurring on or after January 1, 2027,
any hospice claim includes 1 or more modifiers or codes (as specified by the Secretary)
to indicate that such encounter was conducted via telehealth’’ after ‘‘as determined
appropriate by the Secretary’’.
(g) REQUIRING MODIFIERS FOR TELEHEALTH
SERVICES IN CERTAIN INSTANCES.—Section
1834(m) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.
1395m(m)) is amended by adding at the end
the following new paragraph:
‘‘(10) REQUIRED USE OF MODIFIERS IN CERTAIN INSTANCES.—Not later than January 1,
2027, the Secretary shall establish requirements to include one or more codes or modifiers, as determined appropriate by the Secretary, in the case of—
‘‘(A) claims for telehealth services under
this subsection that are furnished through a
telehealth virtual platform—
‘‘(i) by a physician or practitioner that
contracts with an entity that owns such virtual platform; or

PO 00000

Frm 00099

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

‘‘(ii) for which a physician or practitioner
has a payment arrangement with an entity
for use of such virtual platform; and
‘‘(B) claims for telehealth services under
this subsection that are furnished incident
to a physician’s or practitioner’s professional service.’’.
(h)
IMPLEMENTATION.—Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, the Secretary of
Health and Human Services may implement
the amendments made by this section by
program instruction or otherwise.
SEC. 6210. EXTENDING ACUTE HOSPITAL CARE AT
HOME WAIVER FLEXIBILITIES.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1866G(a)(1) of the

Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc–7(a)(1))
is amended by striking ‘‘January 30, 2026’’
and inserting ‘‘September 30, 2030’’.
(b) REQUIRING ADDITIONAL STUDY AND REPORT.—Section 1866G of the Social Security
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc–7) is amended—
(1) in subsection (a)(3)(E)—
(A) in clause (ii), by striking ‘‘the study
described in subsection (b)’’ and inserting
‘‘the studies described in subsections (b) and
(c)’’; and
(B) by adding at the end the following new
flush sentence:
‘‘The Secretary may require that such data
and information be submitted through a hospital’s cost report, through such survey instruments as the Secretary may develop,
through medical record information, or
through such other means as the Secretary
determines appropriate.’’;
(2) in subsection (b)—
(A) in the subsection heading, by striking
‘‘STUDY’’ and inserting ‘‘INITIAL STUDY’’; and
(B) in paragraph (3), by striking ‘‘subsection’’ and inserting ‘‘section’’;
(3) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d)
as subsections (d) and (e), respectively;
(4) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection:
‘‘(c) SUBSEQUENT STUDY AND REPORT.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than September 30, 2029, the Secretary shall conduct
a study to—
‘‘(A) analyze, to the extent practicable, the
criteria established by hospitals under the
Acute Hospital Care at Home initiative to
determine which individuals may be furnished services under such initiative; and
‘‘(B) analyze and compare (both within and
between hospitals participating in the initiative, and relative to comparable hospitals
that do not participate in the initiative, for
relevant parameters such as diagnosis-related groups)—
‘‘(i) quality of care furnished to individuals
with similar conditions and characteristics
in the inpatient setting and through the
Acute Hospital Care at Home initiative, including health outcomes, hospital readmission rates (including readmissions both within and beyond 30 days post-discharge), hospital mortality rates, length of stay, infection rates, composition of care team (including the types of labor used, such as contracted labor), the ratio of nursing staff,
transfers from the hospital to the home,
transfers from the home to the hospital (including the timing, frequency, and causes of
such transfers), transfers and discharges to
post-acute care settings (including the timing, frequency, and causes of such transfers
and discharges), and patient and caregiver
experience of care;
‘‘(ii) clinical conditions treated and diagnosis-related groups of discharges from inpatient settings relative to discharges from the
Acute Hospital Care at Home initiative;
‘‘(iii) costs incurred by the hospital for furnishing care in inpatient settings relative to
costs incurred by the hospital for furnishing
care through the Acute Hospital Care at
Home initiative, including costs relating to
staffing, equipment, food, prescriptions, and

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1274

other services, as determined by the Secretary;
‘‘(iv) the quantity, mix, and intensity of
services (such as in-person visits and virtual
contacts with patients and the intensity of
such services) furnished in inpatient settings
relative to the Acute Hospital Care at Home
initiative, and, to the extent practicable, the
nature and extent of family or caregiver involvement;
‘‘(v) socioeconomic information on individuals treated in comparable inpatient settings
relative to the initiative, including racial
and ethnic data, income, housing, geographic
proximity to the brick-and-mortar facility
and whether such individuals are dually eligible for benefits under this title and title
XIX; and
‘‘(vi) the quality of care, outcomes, costs,
quantity and intensity of services, and other
relevant metrics between individuals who
entered into the Acute Hospital Care at
Home initiative directly from an emergency
department compared with individuals who
entered into the Acute Hospital Care at
Home initiative directly from an existing inpatient stay in a hospital.
‘‘(2) SELECTION BIAS.—In conducting the
study under paragraph (1), the Secretary
shall, to the extent practicable, analyze and
compare individuals who participate and do
not participate in the initiative controlling
for selection bias or other factors that may
impact the reliability of data.
‘‘(3) REPORT.—Not later than September 30,
2029, the Secretary of Health and Human
Services shall—
‘‘(A) submit to the Committee on Ways and
Means of the House of Representatives and
the Committee on Finance of the Senate a
report on the study conducted under paragraph (1); and
‘‘(B) make such report publicly available
on a website of the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services.
‘‘(4) FUNDING.—In addition to amounts otherwise available, there is appropriated to the
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
Program Management Account for fiscal
year 2026, out of any amounts in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $2,500,000, to
remain available until expended, for purposes of carrying out this section.’’; and
(5) in subsection (e), as redesignated by
paragraph (3), by striking ‘‘and (b)(1)’’ and
inserting ‘‘, (b)(1), and (c)(1)’’.
SEC. 6211. IN-HOME CARDIOPULMONARY REHABILITATION FLEXIBILITY.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1861(eee)(2)(A)(ii)

of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.
1395x(eee)(2)(A)(ii)) is amended by inserting
‘‘(including, with respect to items and services furnished through audio and video realtime communications technology (excluding
audio-only) on or after January 31, 2026, and
before January 1, 2028, in the home of an individual who is an outpatient of the hospital)’’ after ‘‘outpatient basis’’.
(b)
IMPLEMENTATION.—Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, the Secretary of
Health and Human Services may implement
the amendment made by subsection (a) by
program instruction or otherwise.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SEC. 6212. ENHANCING CERTAIN PROGRAM INTEGRITY REQUIREMENTS FOR DME
UNDER MEDICARE.
(a) DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 1834(a) of the So-

cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(a)) is
amended by adding at the end the following
new paragraph:
‘‘(23) MASTER LIST INCLUSION AND CLAIM REVIEW FOR CERTAIN ITEMS.—
‘‘(A) MASTER LIST INCLUSION.—Beginning
January 1, 2029, for purposes of the Master
List described in section 414.234(b) of title 42,
Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), in determining which

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

items have aberrant billing patterns (as such
term is used for purposes of such section),
the Secretary shall also treat an item for
which payment may be made under this subsection as having such an aberrant billing
pattern if the Secretary determines that,
without explanatory contributing factors
(such as furnishing emergent care services),
a substantial number of claims for such
items under this subsection are for such
items ordered by a physician or practitioner
who has not previously (during a period of
not less than 24 months, as established by
the Secretary) furnished to the individual involved any item or service for which payment may be made under this title.
‘‘(B) CLAIM REVIEW.—With respect to items
furnished on or after January 1, 2029, that
are included on the Master List pursuant to
subparagraph (A), if such an item is not subject to a determination of coverage in advance pursuant to paragraph (15)(C), the Secretary may conduct prepayment review of
claims for payment for such item.’’.
(2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT FOR PROSTHETIC
DEVICES,
ORTHOTICS,
AND
PROSTHETICS.—Section 1834(h)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(h)(3)) is amended
by inserting ‘‘, and paragraph (23) of subsection (a) shall apply to prosthetic devices,
orthotics, and prosthetics in the same manner as such provision applies to items for
which payment may be made under such subsection’’ before the period at the end.
(b) REPORT ON IDENTIFYING CLINICAL DIAGNOSTIC LABORATORY TESTS AT HIGH RISK FOR
FRAUD AND EFFECTIVE MITIGATION MEASURES.—Not later than January 1, 2028, the Inspector General of the Department of Health
and Human Services shall submit to Congress a report assessing fraud risks relating
to clinical diagnostic laboratory tests for
which payment may be made under section
1834A of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.
1395m–1) and effective tools for reducing such
fraudulent claims. The report may include,
at the Inspector General’s discretion—
(1) which, if any, clinical diagnostic laboratory tests are identified as being at high
risk of fraudulent claims, and an analysis of
the factors that contribute to such risk;
(2) with respect to a clinical diagnostic
laboratory test identified under paragraph
(1) as being at high risk of fraudulent
claims—
(A) the amount payable under such section
1834A with respect to such test;
(B) the number of such tests furnished to
individuals enrolled under part B of title
XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.
1395j et seq.);
(C) whether an order for such a test was
more likely to come from a provider with
whom the individual involved did not have a
prior relationship, as determined on the
basis of prior payment experience; and
(D) the frequency with which a claim for
payment under such section 1834A included
the payment modifier identified by code 59
or 91; and
(3) suggested strategies for reducing the
number of fraudulent claims made with respect to tests so identified as being at high
risk, including—
(A) an analysis of whether the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services can detect aberrant billing patterns with respect to such
tests in a timely manner;
(B) any strategies for identifying and monitoring the providers who are outliers with
respect to the number of such tests that such
providers order; and
(C) targeted education efforts to mitigate
improper billing for such tests; and
(4) such other information as the Inspector
General determines appropriate.
(c) FUNDING.—In addition to amounts otherwise available, there is appropriated to the

PO 00000

Frm 00100

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Inspector General of the Department of
Health and Human Services, out of any
money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $1,200,000 for fiscal year 2026, to remain available until expended, to carry out
this section.
SEC. 6213. GUIDANCE ON FURNISHING SERVICES
VIA TELEHEALTH TO INDIVIDUALS
WITH
LIMITED
ENGLISH
PROFICIENCY.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 1 year

after the date of enactment of this section,
the Secretary of Health and Human Services,
in consultation with 1 or more entities from
each of the categories described in paragraphs (1) through (7) of subsection (b), shall
issue and disseminate, or update and revise
as applicable, guidance for the entities described in such subsection on the following:
(1) Best practices on facilitating and integrating use of interpreters during a telemedicine appointment.
(2) Best practices on providing accessible
instructions on how to access telecommunications systems (as such term is used for
purposes of section 1834(m) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(m)) for individuals with limited English proficiency.
(3) Best practices on improving access to
digital patient portals for individuals with
limited English proficiency.
(4) Best practices on integrating the use of
video platforms that enable multi-person
video calls furnished via a telecommunications system for purposes of providing interpretation during a telemedicine appointment for an individual with limited English
proficiency.
(5) Best practices for providing patient materials, communications, and instructions in
multiple languages, including text message
appointment reminders and prescription information.
(b) ENTITIES DESCRIBED.—For purposes of
subsection (a), an entity described in this
subsection is an entity in 1 or more of the
following categories:
(1) Health information technology service
providers, including—
(A) electronic medical record companies;
(B) remote patient monitoring companies;
and
(C) telehealth or mobile health vendors
and companies.
(2) Health care providers, including—
(A) physicians; and
(B) hospitals.
(3) Health insurers.
(4) Language service companies.
(5) Interpreter or translator professional
associations.
(6) Health and language services quality
certification organizations.
(7) Patient and consumer advocates, including such advocates that work with individuals with limited English proficiency.
SEC. 6214. INCLUSION OF VIRTUAL DIABETES
PREVENTION PROGRAM SUPPLIERS
IN MDPP EXPANDED MODEL.
(a) IN GENERAL.—For the period beginning

on January 1, 2026, and ending on December
31, 2029—
(1) an entity may participate in the MDPP
by offering only MDPP services via distance
learning or online delivery modalities if such
entity meets the conditions for enrollment
as an MDPP supplier;
(2) if an entity participates in the MDPP in
the manner described in paragraph (1), in the
case of online MDPP services furnished by
such entity to an MDPP beneficiary who was
not located in the same State as the entity
at the time such services were furnished, the
entity shall not be prohibited from submitting a claim for payment for such services
solely by reason of the location of such beneficiary at such time; and
(3) no limit is applied on the number of
times an individual may enroll in the MDPP.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

(b) DEFINITIONS.—In this section:
(1) MDPP.—The term ‘‘MDPP’’ means the
Medicare Diabetes Prevention Program (as
such term is defined in section 410.79(b) of
title 42, Code of Federal Regulations).
(2) REGULATORY TERMS.—The terms ‘‘distance
learning’’,
‘‘MDPP
beneficiary’’,
‘‘MDPP services’’, ‘‘MDPP supplier’’, and
‘‘online’’ have the meanings given such
terms in section 410.79(b) of title 42, Code of
Federal Regulations.
(3) SECRETARY.—The term ‘‘Secretary’’
means the Secretary of Health and Human
Services.
(c)
IMPLEMENTATION.—Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, the Secretary
may implement this section by program instruction or otherwise.
SEC.

6215.

MEDICATION-INDUCED MOVEMENT
DISORDER OUTREACH AND EDUCATION.

Not later than January 1, 2028, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall
use existing communications mechanisms to
provide education and outreach to physicians and appropriate non-physician practitioners participating under the Medicare
program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) with respect to periodic screening for medicationinduced movement disorders that are associated with the treatment of mental health
disorders in at-risk patients, as well as resources related to clinical guidelines and
best practices for furnishing such screening
services through telehealth. Such education
and outreach shall include information on
how to account for such screening services in
evaluation and management code selection.
The Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, seek input from relevant stakeholders to inform such education and outreach. Such education and outreach may
also address other relevant screening services furnished through telehealth, as the
Secretary determines appropriate.
SEC. 6216. REPORT ON WEARABLE MEDICAL DEVICES.

Not later than 18 months after the date of
the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller
General of the United States shall conduct a
technology assessment of, and submit to
Congress a report on, the capabilities and
limitations of wearable medical devices used
to support clinical decision-making. Such report shall include a description of—
(1) the potential for such devices to accurately prescribe treatments;
(2) an examination of the benefits and challenges of artificial intelligence to augment
such capabilities; and
(3) policy options to enhance the benefits
and mitigate potential challenges of developing or using such devices.
SEC. 6217. EXTENSION OF TEMPORARY INCLUSION
OF
AUTHORIZED
ORAL
ANTIVIRAL DRUGS AS COVERED
PART D DRUGS.

Section 1860D–2(e)(1)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–102(e)(1)(C)) is
amended by striking ‘‘January 30, 2026’’ and
inserting ‘‘December 31, 2026’’.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SEC. 6218. EXTENSION OF ADJUSTMENT TO CALCULATION
OF
HOSPICE
CAP
AMOUNT UNDER MEDICARE.

Section 1814(i)(2)(B) of the Social Security
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f(i)(2)(B)) is amended—
(1) in clause (ii), by striking ‘‘2033’’ and inserting ‘‘2035’’; and
(2) in clause (iii), by striking ‘‘2033’’ and inserting ‘‘2035’’.
SEC. 6219. ADJUSTMENTS TO MEDICARE PART D
COST-SHARING REDUCTIONS FOR
LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS.

Section 1860D–14(a) of the Social Security
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–114(a)) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (1)(D)(ii), by striking
‘‘that does not exceed $1 for’’ and all that

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1275

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

follows through the period at the end and inserting ″that does not exceed— ‘‘
‘‘(I) for a plan year before 2028—
‘‘(aa) for a generic drug or a preferred drug
that is a multiple source drug (as defined in
section 1927(k)(7)(A)(i)), $1 or, if less, the copayment amount applicable to an individual
under clause (iii); and
‘‘(bb) for any other drug, $3 or, if less, the
copayment amount applicable to an individual under clause (iii); and
‘‘(II) for plan year 2028 and each subsequent
plan year—
‘‘(aa) for a generic drug, $0;
‘‘(bb) for a preferred drug that is a multiple
source
drug
(as
defined
in
section
1927(k)(7)(A)(i)), the dollar amount applied
under this clause for such a drug for the preceding plan year, increased by the annual
percentage increase in the consumer price
index (all items; U.S. city average) as of September of such preceding year, or, if less, the
copayment amount applicable to an individual under clause (iii); and
‘‘(cc) for a drug not described in either
item (aa) or (bb), the dollar amount applied
under this clause for such a drug for the preceding plan year, increased in the manner
specified in item (bb), or, if less, the copayment amount applicable to an individual
under clause (iii).
Any amount established under item (bb) or
(cc) of subclause (II), that is based on an increase of $1 or $3, that is not a multiple of 5
cents or 10 cents, respectively, shall be
rounded to the nearest multiple of 5 cents or
10 cents, respectively.’’; and
(2) in paragraph (4)(A)(ii), by inserting
‘‘(before 2028)’’ after ‘‘a subsequent year’’.
SEC. 6220. REQUIRING ENHANCED AND ACCURATE LISTS OF (REAL) HEALTH PROVIDERS ACT.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1852(c) of the So-

cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–22(c)) is
amended—
(1) in paragraph (1)(C)—
(A) by striking ‘‘plan, and any’’ and inserting ‘‘plan, any’’; and
(B) by inserting the following before the
period: ‘‘, and, in the case of a specified MA
plan (as defined in paragraph (3)(C)), for plan
year 2028 and subsequent plan years, the information described in paragraph (3)(B)’’;
and
(2) by adding at the end the following new
paragraph:
‘‘(3) PROVIDER DIRECTORY ACCURACY.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—For plan year 2028 and
subsequent plan years, each MA organization
offering a specified MA plan (as defined in
subparagraph (C)) shall, for each such plan
offered by the organization—
‘‘(i) maintain, on a publicly available
internet website, an accurate provider directory that includes the information described
in subparagraph (B);
‘‘(ii) not less frequently than once every 90
days (or, in the case of a hospital or any
other facility determined appropriate by the
Secretary, at a lesser frequency specified by
the Secretary but in no case less frequently
than once every 12 months), verify the provider directory information of each provider
listed in such directory and, if applicable,
update such information;
‘‘(iii) if the organization is unable to verify
such information with respect to a provider,
include in such directory an indication that
the information of such provider may not be
up to date; and
‘‘(iv) remove a provider from such directory within 5 business days if the organization determines that the provider is no
longer a provider participating in the network of such plan.
‘‘(B) PROVIDER DIRECTORY INFORMATION.—
The information described in this subparagraph is information enrollees may need to

PO 00000

Frm 00101

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

access covered benefits from a provider with
which such organization offering such plan
has an agreement for furnishing items and
services covered under such plan, such as
name, specialty, contact information, primary office or facility addresses where items
or services are furnished, whether the provider is accepting new patients, accommodations for people with disabilities, cultural
and linguistic capabilities, and telehealth
capabilities.
‘‘(C) SPECIFIED MA PLAN.—In this paragraph, the term ‘specified MA plan’ means—
‘‘(i) a network-based plan (as defined in
subsection (d)(5)(C)); or
‘‘(ii) a Medicare Advantage private fee-forservice plan (as defined in section 1859(b)(2))
that meets the access standards under subsection (d)(4), in whole or in part, through
entering into contracts or agreements as
provided for under subparagraph (B) of such
subsection.’’.
(b) ACCOUNTABILITY FOR PROVIDER DIRECTORY ACCURACY.—
(1) COST SHARING FOR SERVICES FURNISHED
BASED ON RELIANCE ON INCORRECT PROVIDER
DIRECTORY INFORMATION.—Section 1852(d) of

the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–
22(d)) is amended—
(A) in paragraph (1)(C)—
(i) in clause (ii), by striking ‘‘or’’ at the
end;
(ii) in clause (iii), by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting ‘‘, or’’; and
(iii) by adding at the end the following new
clause:
‘‘(iv) for plan year 2028 and subsequent plan
years, in the case of a specified MA plan (as
defined in subsection (c)(3)(C)), the services
were furnished by a provider that was not
participating in the network of such plan but
was listed in the provider directory of such
plan on the date on which the appointment
was made, as described in paragraph (7)(A);’’;
and
(B) by adding at the end the following new
paragraph:
‘‘(7) COST SHARING FOR SERVICES FURNISHED
BASED ON RELIANCE ON INCORRECT PROVIDER
DIRECTORY INFORMATION.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—For plan year 2028 and

subsequent plan years, if an enrollee in a
specified MA plan (as defined in subsection
(c)(3)(C)) is furnished an item or service by a
provider that is not participating in the network of such plan but is listed in the provider directory of such plan (as required to
be provided to an enrollee pursuant to subsection (c)(1)(C)) on the date on which the
appointment is made, and if such item or
service would otherwise be covered under
such plan if furnished by a provider that is
participating in the network of such plan,
the MA organization offering such plan shall
ensure that the enrollee is only responsible
for the lesser of—
‘‘(i) the amount of cost sharing that would
apply if such provider had been participating
in the network of such plan; or
‘‘(ii) the amount of cost sharing that would
otherwise apply (without regard to this subparagraph).
‘‘(B) NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENT.—For plan
year 2028 and subsequent plan years, each
MA organization that offers a specified MA
plan shall—
‘‘(i) notify enrollees of their cost-sharing
protections under this paragraph and make
such notifications, to the extent practicable,
by not later than the first day of an annual,
coordinated election period under section
1851(e)(3) with respect to a year;
‘‘(ii) include information regarding such
cost-sharing protections in the provider directory of each specified MA plan offered by
the MA organization.; and
‘‘(iii) notify enrollees of their cost-sharing
protections under this paragraph in the first

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1276

explanation of benefits issued in a plan
year.’’.
(2) REQUIRED PROVIDER DIRECTORY ACCURACY ANALYSIS AND REPORTS.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Section 1857(e) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–27(e)) is
amended by adding at the end the following
new paragraph:
‘‘(6) PROVIDER DIRECTORY ACCURACY ANALYSIS AND REPORTS.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Beginning with plan
years beginning on or after January 1, 2028,
subject to subparagraph (C), a contract
under this section with an MA organization
shall require the organization, for each specified MA plan (as defined in section
1852(c)(3)(C)) offered by the organization, to
annually do the following:
‘‘(i) Conduct an analysis estimating the accuracy of the provider directory information
of such plan using a random sample of providers included in such provider directory as
follows:
‘‘(I) Such a random sample shall include a
random sample of each specialty of providers
with a high inaccuracy rate of provider directory information relative to other specialties of providers, as determined by the
Secretary.
‘‘(II) For purposes of subclause (I), one type
of specialty may be providers specializing in
mental health or substance use disorder
treatment.
‘‘(ii) Submit to the Secretary a report containing the results of the analysis conducted
under clause (i), including an accuracy score
for such provider directory information (as
determined using a plan verification method
specified by the Secretary under subparagraph (B)(i)).
‘‘(B) DETERMINATION OF ACCURACY SCORE.—
‘‘(i) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall
specify plan verification methods, such as
using telephonic verification or other approaches using data sources maintained by
an MA organization or using publicly available data sets, that MA organizations may
use for estimating accuracy scores of the
provider directory information of specified
MA plans offered by such organizations.
‘‘(ii) ACCURACY SCORE METHODOLOGY.—With
respect to each such method specified by the
Secretary as described in clause (i), the Secretary shall specify a methodology for MA
organizations to use in estimating such accuracy scores. Each such methodology shall
take into account the administrative burden
on plans and providers and the relative importance of certain provider directory information on enrollee ability to access care.
‘‘(C) EXCEPTION.—The Secretary may waive
the requirements of this paragraph in the
case of a specified MA plan with low enrollment (as defined by the Secretary).
‘‘(D) TRANSPARENCY.—Beginning with plan
years beginning on or after January 1, 2029,
the Secretary shall post accuracy scores (as
reported under subparagraph (A)(ii)), in a
machine readable file, on an internet website
maintained by the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services.’’.
(B) PROVISION OF INFORMATION TO BENEFICIARIES.—Section 1851(d)(4) of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–21(d)(4)) is
amended by adding at the end the following
new subparagraph:
‘‘(F) PROVIDER DIRECTORY.—Beginning with
plan years beginning on or after January 1,
2029, in the case of a specified MA plan (as
defined in section 1852(c)(3)(C)), the accuracy
score of the plan’s provider directory (as reported under section 1857(e)(6)(A)(ii)) listed
prominently on the plan’s provider directory.’’.
(C) FUNDING.—In addition to amounts otherwise available, there is appropriated to the
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
Program Management Account, out of any

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $4,000,000 for fiscal year 2026, to remain available until expended, to carry out
the amendments made by this paragraph.
(3) GAO STUDY AND REPORT.—
(A) ANALYSIS.—The Comptroller General of
the United States (in this paragraph referred
to as the ‘‘Comptroller General’’) shall conduct a study of the implementation of the
amendments made by paragraphs (1) and (2).
To the extent data are available and reliable,
such study shall include an analysis of—
(i) the use of cost-sharing protections required under section 1852(d)(7)(A) of the Social Security Act, as added by paragraph (1);
(ii) the trends in provider directory information accuracy scores submitted to the
Secretary of Health and Human Services
under section 1857(e)(6)(A)(ii) of the Social
Security Act (as added by paragraph (2)(A)),
both overall and among providers specializing in mental health or substance use disorder treatment;
(iii) provider response rates by plan
verification methods;
(iv) administrative costs to providers and
Medicare Advantage organizations; and
(v) other items determined appropriate by
the Comptroller General.
(B) REPORT.—Not later than January 15,
2033, the Comptroller General shall submit to
Congress a report containing the results of
the study conducted under subparagraph (A),
together with recommendations for such legislation and administrative action as the
Comptroller General determines appropriate.
(c) GUIDANCE ON MAINTAINING ACCURATE
PROVIDER DIRECTORIES.—
(1) STAKEHOLDER MEETING.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 6 months
after the date of enactment of this Act, the
Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this subsection as the ‘‘Secretary’’) shall hold a public meeting to receive input on approaches for maintaining
accurate provider directories for Medicare
Advantage plans under part C of title XVIII
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–
21 et seq.), including input on approaches for
reducing administrative burden, such as data
standardization, and best practices to maintain accurate provider directory information.
(B) PARTICIPANTS.—Participants of the
meeting under subparagraph (A) shall include representatives from the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services and the Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy and
Office of the National Coordinator for Health
Information Technology. Such meeting shall
be open to the public. To the extent practicable, the Secretary shall include health
care providers, companies that specialize in
relevant technologies, health insurers, and
patient advocates.
(2) GUIDANCE TO MEDICARE ADVANTAGE ORGANIZATIONS.—Not later than 18 months after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue guidance to Medicare Advantage organizations offering Medicare Advantage plans under part C of title XVIII of
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–21 et
seq.) on maintaining accurate provider directories for such plans, taking into consideration input received during the stakeholder
meeting under paragraph (1). Such guidance
may include the following, as determined appropriate by the Secretary:
(A) Best practices for Medicare Advantage
organizations on how to work with providers
to maintain the accuracy of provider directories and reduce provider and Medicare Advantage organization burden with respect to
maintaining the accuracy of provider directories.
(B) Information on data sets and data
sources with information that could be used

PO 00000

Frm 00102

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

by Medicare Advantage organizations to
maintain accurate provider directories.
(C) Approaches for utilizing data sources
maintained by Medicare Advantage organizations and publicly available data sets to
maintain accurate provider directories.
(D) Information that may be useful to include in provider directories for Medicare
beneficiaries to use in assessing plan networks when selecting a plan and accessing
providers participating in plan networks during the plan year.
(3) GUIDANCE TO PART B PROVIDERS.—Not
later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue
guidance to providers of services and suppliers who furnish items or services for
which benefits are available under part B of
title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1395j et seq.) on when to update the
National Plan and Provider Enumeration
System (or a successor system) for information changes.
SEC. 6221. MEDICARE COVERAGE OF MULTI-CANCER EARLY DETECTION SCREENING
TESTS.
(a) COVERAGE.—Section 1861 of the Social

Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended—
(1) in subsection (s)(2)—
(A) by striking the semicolon at the end of
subparagraph (JJ) and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(B) by adding at the end the following new
subparagraph:
‘‘(KK) multi-cancer early detection screening tests (as defined in subsection (nnn));’’;
and
(2) by adding at the end the following new
subsection:
‘‘(nnn) MULTI-CANCER EARLY DETECTION
SCREENING TESTS.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—The term ‘multi-cancer
early detection screening test’ means a test
furnished to an individual for the concurrent
detection of multiple cancer types across
multiple organ sites on or after January 1,
2029, that—
‘‘(A) is cleared under section 510(k), classified under section 513(f)(2), or approved under
section 515 of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act;
‘‘(B) is—
‘‘(i) a genomic sequencing blood or blood
product test that includes the analysis of
cell-free nucleic acids; or
‘‘(ii) a test based on samples of biological
material that provide results comparable to
those obtained with a test described in
clause (i), as determined by the Secretary;
and
‘‘(C) the Secretary determines is—
‘‘(i) reasonable and necessary for the prevention or early detection of an illness or
disability; and
‘‘(ii) appropriate for individuals entitled to
benefits under part A or enrolled under part
B.
‘‘(2) NCD PROCESS.—In making determinations under paragraph (1)(C) regarding the
coverage of a new test, the Secretary shall
use the process for making national coverage
determinations (as defined in section
1869(f)(1)(B)) under this title.’’.
(b) PAYMENT AND STANDARDS FOR MULTICANCER
EARLY
DETECTION
SCREENING
TESTS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 1834 of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m) is amended by
adding at the end the following new subsection:
‘‘(aa) PAYMENT AND STANDARDS FOR MULTICANCER
EARLY
DETECTION
SCREENING
TESTS.—
‘‘(1) PAYMENT AMOUNT.—The payment
amount for a multi-cancer early detection
screening test (as defined in section
1861(nnn)) is—
‘‘(A) with respect to such a test furnished
before January 1, 2031, equal to the payment

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

amount in effect on the date of the enactment of this subsection for a multi-target
stool screening DNA test covered pursuant
to section 1861(pp)(1)(D); and
‘‘(B) with respect to such a test furnished
on or after January 1, 2031, equal to the lesser of—
‘‘(i) the amount described in subparagraph
(A); or
‘‘(ii) the payment amount determined for
such test under section 1834A.
‘‘(2) LIMITATIONS.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—No payment may be
made under this part for a multi-cancer
early detection screening test furnished during a year to an individual if—
‘‘(i) such individual—
‘‘(I) is under 50 years of age; or
‘‘(II) as of January 1 of such year, has attained the age specified in subparagraph (B)
for such year; or
‘‘(ii) such a test was furnished to the individual during the previous 11 months.
‘‘(B) AGE SPECIFIED.—For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i)(II), the age specified in this
subparagraph is—
‘‘(i) for 2029, 65 years of age; and
‘‘(ii) for a succeeding year, the age specified in this subparagraph for the preceding
year, increased by 1 year.
‘‘(C) STANDARDS FOLLOWING USPSTF RATING
OF A OR B.—In the case of a multi-cancer
early detection screening test that is recommended with a grade of A or B by the
United States Preventive Services Task
Force, beginning on the date on which coverage for such test is provided pursuant to
section 1861(ddd)(1), the preceding provisions
of this paragraph shall not apply.’’.
(2) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.—
(A) Section 1833 of the Social Security Act
(42 U.S.C. 1395l) is amended—
(i) in subsection (a)—
(I) in paragraph (1)(D)(i)(I), by striking
‘‘section 1834(d)(1)’’ and inserting ‘‘subsection (d)(1) or (aa) of section 1834’’; and
(II) in paragraph (2)(D)(i)(I), by striking
‘‘section 1834(d)(1)’’ and inserting ‘‘subsection (d)(1) or (aa) of section 1834’’; and
(ii) in subsection (h)(1)(A), by striking
‘‘section 1834(d)(1)’’ and inserting ‘‘subsections (d)(1) and (aa) of section 1834’’.
(B) Section 1862(a)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(1)(A)) is amended—
(i) by striking ‘‘or additional preventive
services’’ and inserting ‘‘, additional preventive services’’; and
(ii) by inserting ‘‘, or multi-cancer early
detection screening tests (as defined in section 1861(nnn))’’ after ‘‘(as described in section 1861(ddd)(1))’’.
(c) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION RELATING TO
OTHER CANCER SCREENING TESTS.—Nothing
in this section, including the amendments
made by this section, shall be construed—
(1) in the case of an individual who undergoes a multi-cancer early detection screening test, to affect coverage under part B of
title XVIII of the Social Security Act for
other cancer screening tests covered under
such title, such as screening tests for breast,
cervical, colorectal, lung, or prostate cancer;
or
(2) in the case of an individual who undergoes another cancer screening test, to affect
coverage under such part for a multi-cancer
early detection screening test or the use of
such a test as a diagnostic or confirmatory
test for a result of the other cancer screening test.
(d) FUNDING.—In addition to amounts otherwise available, there is appropriated to the
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
Program Management Account, out of any
money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $2,000,000 for fiscal year 2026, to re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1277

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

main available until expended, to carry out
this section.
SEC. 6222. MEDICARE COVERAGE OF EXTERNAL
INFUSION PUMPS AND NON-SELF-ADMINISTRABLE
HOME
INFUSION
DRUGS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1861(n) of the So-

cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(n)) is
amended by adding at the end the following
new sentence: ‘‘Beginning with the first calendar quarter beginning on or after the date
that is 1 year after the date of the enactment
of this sentence, an external infusion pump
and associated home infusion drug (as defined in subsection (iii)(3)(C)) or other associated supplies that do not meet the appropriate for use in the home requirement applied to the definition of durable medical
equipment under section 414.202 of title 42,
Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor to such regulation) shall be treated as
meeting such requirement if each of the following criteria is satisfied:
‘‘(1) The prescribing information approved
by the Food and Drug Administration for the
home infusion drug associated with the
pump instructs that the drug should be administered by or under the supervision of a
health care professional.
‘‘(2) A qualified home infusion therapy supplier (as defined in subsection (iii)(3)(D)) administers or supervises the administration of
the drug or biological in a safe and effective
manner in the patient’s home (as defined in
subsection (iii)(3)(B)).
‘‘(3) The prescribing information described
in paragraph (1) instructs that the drug
should be infused at least 12 times per year—
‘‘(A) intravenously or subcutaneously; or
‘‘(B) at infusion rates that the Secretary
determines would require the use of an external infusion pump.’’.
(b) COST SHARING NOTIFICATION.—The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall
ensure that patients are notified of the cost
sharing for electing home infusion therapy
compared to other applicable settings of care
for the furnishing of infusion drugs under the
Medicare program.
SEC. 6223. ASSURING PHARMACY ACCESS AND
CHOICE
FOR
MEDICARE
BENEFICIARIES.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1860D–4(b)(1) of

the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–
104(b)(1)) is amended by striking subparagraph (A) and inserting the following:
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—
‘‘(i) PARTICIPATION OF ANY WILLING PHARMACY.—A PDP sponsor offering a prescription drug plan shall permit any pharmacy
that meets the standard contract terms and
conditions under such plan to participate as
a network pharmacy of such plan.
‘‘(ii) CONTRACT TERMS AND CONDITIONS.—
‘‘(I) IN GENERAL.—Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2029, in accordance with clause (i), contract terms and conditions offered by such PDP sponsor shall be
reasonable and relevant according to standards established by the Secretary under subclause (II).
‘‘(II) STANDARDS.—Not later than the first
Monday in April of 2028, the Secretary shall
establish standards for reasonable and relevant contract terms and conditions for purposes of this clause.
‘‘(III) REQUEST FOR INFORMATION.—Not
later than April 1, 2027, for purposes of establishing the standards under subclause (II),
the Secretary shall issue a request for information to seek input on trends in prescription drug plan and network pharmacy contract terms and conditions, current prescription drug plan and network pharmacy contracting practices, whether pharmacy reimbursement and dispensing fees paid by PDP
sponsors to network pharmacies sufficiently

PO 00000

Frm 00103

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

cover the ingredient and operational costs of
such pharmacies, the use and application of
pharmacy quality measures by PDP sponsors
for network pharmacies, PDP sponsor restrictions or limitations on the dispensing of
covered part D drugs by network pharmacies
(or any subsets of such pharmacies), PDP
sponsor auditing practices for network pharmacies, areas in current regulations or program guidance related to contracting between prescription drug plans and network
pharmacies requiring clarification or additional specificity, factors for consideration
in determining the reasonableness and relevance of contract terms and conditions between prescription drug plans and network
pharmacies, and other issues as determined
appropriate by the Secretary.’’.
(b) ESSENTIAL RETAIL PHARMACIES.—Section 1860D–42 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1395w–152) is amended by adding at the
end the following new subsection:
‘‘(e) ESSENTIAL RETAIL PHARMACIES.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—With respect to plan
years beginning on or after January 1, 2028,
the Secretary shall publish reports, at least
once every 2 years until 2034, and periodically thereafter, that provide information, to
the extent feasible, on—
‘‘(A) trends in ingredient cost reimbursement, dispensing fees, incentive payments
and other fees paid by PDP sponsors offering
prescription drug plans and MA organizations offering MA–PD plans under this part
to essential retail pharmacies (as defined in
paragraph (2)) with respect to the dispensing
of covered part D drugs, including a comparison of such trends between essential retail
pharmacies and pharmacies that are not essential retail pharmacies;
‘‘(B) trends in amounts paid to PDP sponsors offering prescription drug plans and MA
organizations offering MA–PD plans under
this part by essential retail pharmacies with
respect to the dispensing of covered part D
drugs, including a comparison of such trends
between essential retail pharmacies and
pharmacies that are not essential retail
pharmacies;
‘‘(C) trends in essential retail pharmacy
participation in pharmacy networks and preferred pharmacy networks for prescription
drug plans offered by PDP sponsors and MA–
PD plans offered by MA organizations under
this part, including a comparison of such
trends between essential retail pharmacies
and pharmacies that are not essential retail
pharmacies;
‘‘(D) trends in the number of essential retail pharmacies, including variation in such
trends by geographic region or other factors;
‘‘(E) a comparison of cost-sharing for covered part D drugs dispensed by essential retail pharmacies that are network pharmacies
for prescription drug plans offered by PDP
sponsors and MA–PD plans offered by MA organizations under this part and cost-sharing
for covered part D drugs dispensed by other
network pharmacies for such plans located
in similar geographic areas that are not essential retail pharmacies;
‘‘(F) a comparison of the volume of covered
part D drugs dispensed by essential retail
pharmacies that are network pharmacies for
prescription drug plans offered by PDP sponsors and MA–PD plans offered by MA organizations under this part and such volume of
dispensing by network pharmacies for such
plans located in similar geographic areas
that are not essential retail pharmacies, including information on any patterns or
trends in such comparison specific to certain
types of covered part D drugs, such as generic drugs or drugs specified as specialty
drugs by a PDP sponsor under a prescription
drug plan or an MA organization under an
MA–PD plan; and

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1278

‘‘(G) a comparison of the information described in subparagraphs (A) through (F) between essential retail pharmacies that are
network pharmacies for prescription drug
plans offered by PDP sponsors under this
part and essential retail pharmacies that are
network pharmacies for MA–PD plans offered
by MA organizations under this part.
‘‘(2) DEFINITION OF ESSENTIAL RETAIL PHARMACY.—In this subsection, the term ‘essential retail pharmacy’ means, with respect to
a plan year, a retail pharmacy that—
‘‘(A) is not a pharmacy that is an affiliate
as defined in paragraph (4); and
‘‘(B) is located in—
‘‘(i) a rural area in which there is no other
retail pharmacy within 10 miles, as determined by the Secretary;
‘‘(ii) a suburban area in which there is no
other retail pharmacy within 2 miles, as determined by the Secretary; or
‘‘(iii) an urban area in which there is no
other retail pharmacy within 1 mile, as determined by the Secretary.
‘‘(3) LIST OF ESSENTIAL RETAIL PHARMACIES.—
‘‘(A) PUBLICATION OF LIST OF ESSENTIAL RETAIL PHARMACIES.—For each plan year (beginning with plan year 2028), the Secretary
shall publish, on a publicly available internet website of the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services, a list of retail pharmacies
that meet the criteria described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (2) to be considered an essential retail pharmacy.
‘‘(B) REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS FROM PDP SPONSORS.—For each plan year (beginning with
plan year 2028), each PDP sponsor offering a
prescription drug plan and each MA organization offering an MA–PD plan shall submit
to the Secretary, for the purposes of determining retail pharmacies that meet the criterion specified in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2), a list of retail pharmacies that are
affiliates of such sponsor or organization, or
are affiliates of a pharmacy benefit manager
acting on behalf of such sponsor or organization, at a time, and in a form and manner,
specified by the Secretary.
‘‘(C) REPORTING BY PDP SPONSORS AND MA
ORGANIZATIONS.—For each plan year beginning with plan year 2027, each PDP sponsor
offering a prescription drug plan and each
MA organization offering an MA–PD plan
under this part shall submit to the Secretary
information on incentive payments and
other fees paid by such sponsor or organization to pharmacies, insofar as any such payments or fees are not otherwise reported, at
a time, and in a form and manner, specified
by the Secretary.
‘‘(D)
IMPLEMENTATION.—Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, the Secretary
may implement this paragraph by program
instruction or otherwise.
‘‘(E) NONAPPLICATION OF PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT.—Chapter 35 of title 44, United
States Code, shall not apply to the implementation of this paragraph.
‘‘(4) DEFINITION OF AFFILIATE; PHARMACY
BENEFIT MANAGER.—In this subsection, the
terms ‘affiliate’ and ‘pharmacy benefit manager’ have the meaning given those terms in
section 1860D–12(h)(7).’’.
(c) ENFORCEMENT.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 1860D–4(b)(1) of
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–
104(b)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the
following new subparagraph:
‘‘(F) ENFORCEMENT OF STANDARDS FOR REASONABLE AND RELEVANT CONTRACT TERMS AND
CONDITIONS.—
‘‘(i) ALLEGATION SUBMISSION PROCESS.—
‘‘(I) IN GENERAL.—Not later than January

1, 2029, the Secretary shall establish a process through which a pharmacy may submit
to the Secretary an allegation of a violation
by a PDP sponsor offering a prescription

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

drug plan of the standards for reasonable and
relevant contract terms and conditions
under subparagraph (A)(ii), or of subclause
(VIII) of this clause.
‘‘(II) FREQUENCY OF SUBMISSION.—
‘‘(aa) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in
item (bb), the allegation submission process
under this clause shall allow pharmacies to
submit any allegations of violations described in subclause (I) not more frequently
than once per plan year per contract between
a pharmacy and a PDP sponsor.
‘‘(bb) ALLEGATIONS RELATING TO CONTRACT
MODIFICATIONS.—In the case where a contract
between a pharmacy and a PDP sponsor is
modified following the submission of allegations by a pharmacy with respect to such
contract and plan year, the allegation submission process under this clause shall allow
such pharmacy to submit an additional allegation related to those modifications with
respect to such contract and plan year.
‘‘(III) ACCESS TO RELEVANT DOCUMENTS AND
MATERIALS.—A PDP sponsor subject to an allegation under this clause—
‘‘(aa) shall provide documents or materials, as specified by the Secretary, including
contract offers made by such sponsor to such
pharmacy or correspondence related to such
offers, to the Secretary at a time, and in a
form and manner, specified by the Secretary;
and
‘‘(bb) shall not prohibit or otherwise limit
the ability of a pharmacy to submit such
documents or materials to the Secretary for
the purpose of submitting an allegation or
providing evidence for such an allegation
under this clause.
‘‘(IV) STANDARDIZED TEMPLATE.—The Secretary shall establish a standardized template for pharmacies to use for the submission of allegations described in subclause (I).
Such template shall require that the submission include a certification by the pharmacy
that the information included is accurate,
complete, and true to the best of the knowledge, information, and belief of such pharmacy.
FRIVOLOUS
ALLEGA‘‘(V)
PREVENTING
TIONS.—In the case where the Secretary determines that a pharmacy has submitted
frivolous allegations under this clause on a
routine basis, the Secretary may temporarily prohibit such pharmacy from using
the allegation submission process under this
clause, as determined appropriate by the
Secretary.
‘‘(VI) EXEMPTION FROM FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT.—Allegations submitted under
this clause shall be exempt from disclosure
under section 552 of title 5, United States
Code.
‘‘(VII) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in
this clause shall be construed as limiting the
ability of a pharmacy to pursue other legal
actions or remedies, consistent with applicable Federal or State law, with respect to a
potential violation of a requirement described in this subparagraph.
‘‘(VIII) ANTI-RETALIATION AND ANTI-COERCION.—Consistent with applicable Federal or
State law, a PDP sponsor shall not—
‘‘(aa) retaliate against a pharmacy for submitting any allegations under this clause; or
‘‘(bb) coerce, intimidate, threaten, or
interfere with the ability of a pharmacy to
submit any such allegations.
‘‘(ii) INVESTIGATION.—The Secretary shall
investigate, as determined appropriate by
the Secretary, allegations submitted pursuant to clause (i).
‘‘(iii) ENFORCEMENT.—
‘‘(I) IN GENERAL.—In the case where the
Secretary determines that a PDP sponsor offering a prescription drug plan has violated
the standards for reasonable and relevant
contract terms and conditions under subparagraph (A)(ii) or the provisions of clause

PO 00000

Frm 00104

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(i)(VIII) of this subparagraph, the Secretary
may use authorities under sections 1857(g)
and 1860D–12(b)(3)(E) to impose civil monetary penalties or other intermediate sanctions.
‘‘(II) APPLICATION OF CIVIL MONETARY PENALTIES.—The provisions of section 1128A
(other than subsections (a) and (b)) shall
apply to a civil monetary penalty under this
clause in the same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding under
section 1128A(a).’’.
AMENDMENT.—Section
(2)
CONFORMING
1857(g)(1) of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1395w–27(g)(1)) is amended—
(A) in subparagraph (J), by striking ‘‘or’’
after the semicolon;
(B) by redesignating subparagraph (K) as
subparagraph (L);
(C) by inserting after subparagraph (J), the
following new subparagraph:
‘‘(K) fails to comply with the standards for
reasonable and relevant contract terms and
conditions under subparagraph (A)(ii) of section 1860D–4(b)(1) or violates the provisions
of subparagraph (F)(i)(VIII) of such section;
or’’;
(D) in subparagraph (L), as redesignated by
subparagraph (B), by striking ‘‘through (J)’’
and inserting ‘‘through (K)’’; and
(E) in the flush matter following subparagraph (L), as so redesignated, by striking
‘‘subparagraphs (A) through (K)’’ and inserting ‘‘subparagraphs (A) through (L)’’.
(d) ACCOUNTABILITY OF PHARMACY BENEFIT
MANAGERS FOR VIOLATIONS OF REASONABLE
AND RELEVANT CONTRACT TERMS AND CONDITIONS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 1860D–12(b) of the
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–112) is
amended by adding at the end the following
new paragraph:
‘‘(9) ACCOUNTABILITY OF PHARMACY BENEFIT
MANAGERS FOR VIOLATIONS OF REASONABLE
AND RELEVANT CONTRACT TERMS AND CONDITIONS.—For plan years beginning on or after

January 1, 2029, each contract entered into
with a PDP sponsor under this part with respect to a prescription drug plan offered by
such sponsor shall provide that any pharmacy benefit manager acting on behalf of
such sponsor has a written agreement with
the PDP sponsor under which the pharmacy
benefit manager agrees to reimburse the
PDP sponsor for any amounts paid by such
sponsor under section 1860D–4(b)(1)(F)(iii)(I)
to the Secretary as a result of a violation described in such section if such violation is related to a responsibility delegated to the
pharmacy benefit manager by such PDP
sponsor.’’.
(2) MA–PD PLANS.—Section 1857(f)(3) of the
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–27(f)(3))
is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
‘‘(F) ACCOUNTABILITY OF PHARMACY BENEFIT
MANAGERS FOR VIOLATIONS OF REASONABLE
AND RELEVANT CONTRACT TERMS.—For plan

years beginning on or after January 1, 2029,
section 1860D–12(b)(9).’’.
(e) BIENNIAL REPORT ON ENFORCEMENT AND
OVERSIGHT OF PHARMACY ACCESS REQUIREMENTS.—Section 1860D–42 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–152), as amended by
subsection (b), is amended by adding at the
end the following new subsection:
‘‘(f) BIENNIAL REPORT ON ENFORCEMENT AND
OVERSIGHT OF PHARMACY ACCESS REQUIREMENTS.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 2 years
after the date of enactment of this subsection, and at least once every 2 years
thereafter, the Secretary shall publish a report on enforcement and oversight actions
and activities undertaken by the Secretary
with respect to the requirements under section 1860D–4(b)(1).

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

‘‘(2) LIMITATION.—A report under paragraph
(1) shall not disclose—
‘‘(A) identifiable information about individuals or entities unless such information is
otherwise publicly available; or
‘‘(B) trade secrets with respect to any entities.’’.
(f) FUNDING.—In addition to amounts otherwise available, there is appropriated to the
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
Program Management Account, out of any
money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $188,000,000 for fiscal year 2026, to remain available until expended, to carry out
this section.
SEC. 6224. MODERNIZING AND ENSURING PBM
ACCOUNTABILITY.
(a) IN GENERAL.—
(1) PRESCRIPTION DRUG PLANS.—Section

1860D–12 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.
1395w–112) is amended by adding at the end
the following new subsection:
‘‘(h) REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO PHARMACY
BENEFIT MANAGERS.—For plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2028:
‘‘(1) AGREEMENTS WITH PHARMACY BENEFIT
MANAGERS.—Each contract entered into with
a PDP sponsor under this part with respect
to a prescription drug plan offered by such
sponsor shall provide that any pharmacy
benefit manager acting on behalf of such
sponsor has a written agreement with the
PDP sponsor under which the pharmacy benefit manager, and any affiliates of such pharmacy benefit manager, as applicable, agree
to meet the following requirements:
‘‘(A) NO INCOME OTHER THAN BONA FIDE
SERVICE FEES.—
‘‘(i) IN GENERAL.—The pharmacy benefit
manager and any affiliate of such pharmacy
benefit manager shall not derive any remuneration with respect to any services provided on behalf of any entity or individual,
in connection with the utilization of covered
part D drugs, from any such entity or individual other than bona fide service fees, subject to clauses (ii) and (iii).
‘‘(ii) INCENTIVE PAYMENTS.—For the purposes of this subsection, an incentive payment (as determined by the Secretary) paid
by a PDP sponsor to a pharmacy benefit
manager or an affiliate of a pharmacy benefit manager that is performing services on
behalf of such sponsor shall be deemed a
‘bona fide service fee’ (even if such payment
does not otherwise meet the definition of
such term under paragraph (7)(B)) if such
payment is a flat dollar amount, is consistent with fair market value (as specified
by the Secretary), is related to services actually performed by the pharmacy benefit
manager or affiliate of such pharmacy benefit manager, on behalf of the PDP sponsor
making such payment, in connection with
the utilization of covered part D drugs, and
meets additional requirements, if any, as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
‘‘(iii) CLARIFICATION ON REBATES AND DIS-

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

COUNTS USED TO LOWER COSTS FOR COVERED
PART D DRUGS.—Rebates, discounts, and

other price concessions received by a pharmacy benefit manager or an affiliate of a
pharmacy benefit manager from manufacturers, even if such price concessions are calculated as a percentage of a drug’s price,
shall not be considered a violation of the requirements of clause (i) if they are fully
passed through to a PDP sponsor and are
compliant with all regulatory and subregulatory requirements related to direct and indirect remuneration for manufacturer rebates, discounts, and other price concessions
under this part, including in cases where a
PDP sponsor is acting as a pharmacy benefit
manager on behalf of a prescription drug
plan offered by such PDP sponsor.
‘‘(iv) EVALUATION OF REMUNERATION ARRANGEMENTS.—Components of subsets of re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1279

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

muneration arrangements (such as fees or
other forms of compensation paid to or retained by the pharmacy benefit manager or
affiliate of such pharmacy benefit manager),
as determined appropriate by the Secretary,
between pharmacy benefit managers or affiliates of such pharmacy benefit managers,
as applicable, and other entities involved in
the dispensing or utilization of covered part
D drugs (including PDP sponsors, manufacturers, pharmacies, and other entities as determined appropriate by the Secretary) shall
be subject to review by the Secretary, in
consultation with the Office of the Inspector
General of the Department of Health and
Human Services, as determined appropriate
by the Secretary. The Secretary, in consultation with the Office of the Inspector
General, shall review whether remuneration
under such arrangements is consistent with
fair market value (as specified by the Secretary) through reviews and assessments of
such remuneration, as determined appropriate.
‘‘(v) DISGORGEMENT.—The pharmacy benefit manager shall disgorge any remuneration paid to such pharmacy benefit manager
or an affiliate of such pharmacy benefit
manager in violation of this subparagraph to
the PDP sponsor.
REQUIREMENTS.—The
‘‘(vi)
ADDITIONAL
pharmacy benefit manager shall—
‘‘(I) enter into a written agreement with
any affiliate of such pharmacy benefit manager, under which the affiliate shall identify
and disgorge any remuneration described in
clause (v) to the pharmacy benefit manager;
and
‘‘(II) attest, subject to any requirements
determined appropriate by the Secretary,
that the pharmacy benefit manager has entered into a written agreement described in
subclause (I) with any affiliate of the pharmacy benefit manager.
‘‘(B) TRANSPARENCY REGARDING GUARANTEES AND COST PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS.—
The pharmacy benefit manager shall—
‘‘(i) define, interpret, and apply, in a fully
transparent and consistent manner for purposes of calculating or otherwise evaluating
pharmacy benefit manager performance
against pricing guarantees or similar cost
performance measurements related to rebates, discounts, price concessions, or net
costs, terms such as—
‘‘(I) ‘generic drug’, in a manner consistent
with the definition of the term under section
423.4 of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations,
or a successor regulation;
‘‘(II) ‘brand name drug’, in a manner consistent with the definition of the term under
section 423.4 of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations, or a successor regulation;
‘‘(III) ‘specialty drug’;
‘‘(IV) ‘rebate’; and
‘‘(V) ‘discount’;
‘‘(ii) identify any drugs, claims, or price
concessions excluded from any pricing guarantee or other cost performance measure in
a clear and consistent manner; and
‘‘(iii) where a pricing guarantee or other
cost performance measure is based on a pricing benchmark other than the wholesale acquisition cost (as defined in section
1847A(c)(6)(B)) of a drug, calculate and provide a wholesale acquisition cost-based
equivalent to the pricing guarantee or other
cost performance measure.
‘‘(C) PROVISION OF INFORMATION.—
‘‘(i) IN GENERAL.—Not later than July 1 of
each year, beginning in 2028, the pharmacy
benefit manager shall submit to the PDP
sponsor, and to the Secretary, a report, in
accordance with this subparagraph, and shall
make such report available to such sponsor
at no cost to such sponsor in a format specified by the Secretary under paragraph (5).
Each such report shall include, with respect

PO 00000

Frm 00105

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

to such PDP sponsor and each plan offered
by such sponsor, the following information
with respect to the previous plan year:
‘‘(I) A list of all drugs covered by the plan
that were dispensed including, with respect
to each such drug—
‘‘(aa) the brand name, generic or non-proprietary name, and National Drug Code;
‘‘(bb) the number of plan enrollees for
whom the drug was dispensed, the total number of prescription claims for the drug (including original prescriptions and refills,
counted as separate claims), and the total
number of dosage units of the drug dispensed;
‘‘(cc) the number of prescription claims described in item (bb) by each type of dispensing channel through which the drug was
dispensed, including retail, mail order, specialty pharmacy, long term care pharmacy,
home infusion pharmacy, or other types of
pharmacies or dispensers;
‘‘(dd) the average wholesale acquisition
cost, listed as cost per day’s supply, cost per
dosage unit, and cost per typical course of
treatment (as applicable);
‘‘(ee) the average wholesale price for the
drug, listed as price per day’s supply, price
per dosage unit, and price per typical course
of treatment (as applicable);
‘‘(ff) the total out-of-pocket spending by
plan enrollees on such drug after application
of any benefits under the plan, including
plan enrollee spending through copayments,
coinsurance, and deductibles;
‘‘(gg) total rebates paid by the manufacturer on the drug as reported under the Detailed DIR Report (or any successor report)
submitted by such sponsor to the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services;
‘‘(hh) all other direct or indirect remuneration on the drug as reported under the Detailed DIR Report (or any successor report)
submitted by such sponsor to the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services;
‘‘(ii) the average pharmacy reimbursement
amount paid by the plan for the drug in the
aggregate and disaggregated by dispensing
channel identified in item (cc);
‘‘(jj) the average National Average Drug
Acquisition Cost (NADAC); and
‘‘(kk) total manufacturer-derived revenue,
inclusive of bona fide service fees, attributable to the drug and retained by the pharmacy benefit manager and any affiliate of
such pharmacy benefit manager.
‘‘(II) In the case of a pharmacy benefit
manager that has an affiliate that is a retail,
mail order, or specialty pharmacy, with respect to drugs covered by such plan that
were dispensed, the following information:
‘‘(aa) The percentage of total prescriptions
that were dispensed by pharmacies that are
an affiliate of the pharmacy benefit manager
for each drug.
‘‘(bb) The interquartile range of the total
combined costs paid by the plan and plan enrollees, per dosage unit, per course of treatment, per 30-day supply, and per 90-day supply for each drug dispensed by pharmacies
that are not an affiliate of the pharmacy
benefit manager and that are included in the
pharmacy network of such plan.
‘‘(cc) The interquartile range of the total
combined costs paid by the plan and plan enrollees, per dosage unit, per course of treatment, per 30-day supply, and per 90-day supply for each drug dispensed by pharmacies
that are an affiliate of the pharmacy benefit
manager and that are included in the pharmacy network of such plan.
‘‘(dd) The lowest total combined cost paid
by the plan and plan enrollees, per dosage
unit, per course of treatment, per 30-day supply, and per 90-day supply, for each drug that
is available from any pharmacy included in
the pharmacy network of such plan.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1280

‘‘(ee) The difference between the average
acquisition cost of the affiliate, such as a
pharmacy or other entity that acquires prescription drugs, that initially acquires the
drug and the amount reported under subclause (I)(jj) for each drug.
‘‘(ff) A list inclusive of the brand name, generic or non-proprietary name, and National
Drug Code of covered part D drugs subject to
an agreement with a covered entity under
section 340B of the Public Health Service Act
for which the pharmacy benefit manager or
an affiliate of the pharmacy benefit manager
had a contract or other arrangement with
such a covered entity in the service area of
such plan.
‘‘(III) Where a drug approved under section
505(c) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (referred to in this subclause as
the ‘listed drug’) is covered by the plan, the
following information:
‘‘(aa) A list of currently marketed generic
drugs approved under section 505(j) of the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act pursuant to an application that references such
listed drug that are not covered by the plan,
are covered on the same formulary tier or a
formulary tier typically associated with
higher cost-sharing than the listed drug, or
are subject to utilization management that
the listed drug is not subject to.
‘‘(bb) The estimated average beneficiary
cost-sharing under the plan for a 30-day supply of the listed drug.
‘‘(cc) Where a generic drug listed under
item (aa) is on a formulary tier typically associated with higher cost-sharing than the
listed drug, the estimated average cost-sharing that a beneficiary would have paid for a
30-day supply of each of the generic drugs described in item (aa), had the plan provided
coverage for such drugs on the same formulary tier as the listed drug.
‘‘(dd) A written justification for providing
more favorable coverage of the listed drug
than the generic drugs described in item
(aa).
‘‘(ee) The number of currently marketed
generic drugs approved under section 505(j) of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
pursuant to an application that references
such listed drug.
‘‘(IV) Where a reference product (as defined
in section 351(i) of the Public Health Service
Act) is covered by the plan, the following information:
‘‘(aa) A list of currently marketed biosimilar biological products licensed under
section 351(k) of the Public Health Service
Act pursuant to an application that refers to
such reference product that are not covered
by the plan, are covered on the same formulary tier or a formulary tier typically associated with higher cost-sharing than the
reference product, or are subject to utilization management that the reference product
is not subject to.
‘‘(bb) The estimated average beneficiary
cost-sharing under the plan for a 30-day supply of the reference product.
‘‘(cc) Where a biosimilar biological product
listed under item (aa) is on a formulary tier
typically associated with higher cost-sharing
than the reference product, the estimated
average cost-sharing that a beneficiary
would have paid for a 30-day supply of each
of the biosimilar biological products described in item (aa), had the plan provided
coverage for such products on the same formulary tier as the reference product.
‘‘(dd) A written justification for providing
more favorable coverage of the reference
product than the biosimilar biological products described in item (aa).
‘‘(ee) The number of currently marketed
biosimilar biological products licensed under
section 351(k) of the Public Health Service

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Act, pursuant to an application that refers
to such reference product.
‘‘(V) Total gross spending on covered part
D drugs by the plan, not net of rebates, fees,
discounts, or other direct or indirect remuneration.
‘‘(VI) The total amount retained by the
pharmacy benefit manager or an affiliate of
such pharmacy benefit manager in revenue
related to utilization of covered part D drugs
under that plan, inclusive of bona fide service fees.
‘‘(VII) The total spending on covered part
D drugs net of rebates, fees, discounts, or
other direct and indirect remuneration by
the plan.
‘‘(VIII) An explanation of any benefit design parameters under such plan that encourage plan enrollees to fill prescriptions at
pharmacies that are an affiliate of such
pharmacy benefit manager, such as mail and
specialty home delivery programs, and retail
and mail auto-refill programs.
‘‘(IX) The following information:
‘‘(aa) A list of all brokers, consultants, advisors, and auditors that receive compensation from the pharmacy benefit manager or
an affiliate of such pharmacy benefit manager for referrals, consulting, auditing, or
other services offered to PDP sponsors related to pharmacy benefit management services.
‘‘(bb) The amount of compensation provided by such pharmacy benefit manager or
affiliate to each such broker, consultant, advisor, and auditor.
‘‘(cc) The methodology for calculating the
amount of compensation provided by such
pharmacy benefit manager or affiliate, for
each such broker, consultant, advisor, and
auditor.
‘‘(X) A list of all affiliates of the pharmacy
benefit manager.
‘‘(XI) A summary document submitted in a
standardized template developed by the Secretary that includes such information described in subclauses (I) through (X).
‘‘(ii) WRITTEN EXPLANATION OF CONTRACTS
OR AGREEMENTS WITH MANUFACTURERS.—
‘‘(I) IN GENERAL.—The pharmacy benefit
manager shall, not later than 30 days after
the finalization of any contract or agreement between such pharmacy benefit manager or an affiliate of such pharmacy benefit
manager and a manufacturer (or subsidiary,
agent, or entity affiliated with such manufacturer) that makes rebates, discounts, payments, or other financial incentives related
to one or more covered part D drugs or other
prescription drugs, as applicable, of the manufacturer directly or indirectly contingent
upon coverage, formulary placement, or utilization management conditions on any
other covered part D drugs or other prescription drugs, as applicable, submit to the PDP
sponsor a written explanation of such contract or agreement.
‘‘(II) REQUIREMENTS.—A written explanation under subclause (I) shall—
‘‘(aa) include the manufacturer subject to
the contract or agreement, all covered part
D drugs and other prescription drugs, as applicable, subject to the contract or agreement and the manufacturers of such drugs,
and a high-level description of the terms of
such contract or agreement and how such
terms apply to such drugs; and
‘‘(bb) be certified by the Chief Executive
Officer, Chief Financial Officer, or General
Counsel of such pharmacy benefit manager,
or affiliate of such pharmacy benefit manager, as applicable, or an individual delegated with the authority to sign on behalf of
one of these officers, who reports directly to
the officer.
‘‘(III) DEFINITION OF OTHER PRESCRIPTION
DRUGS.—For purposes of this clause, the
term ‘other prescription drugs’ means pre-

PO 00000

Frm 00106

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

scription drugs covered as supplemental benefits under this part or prescription drugs
paid outside of this part.
‘‘(D) AUDIT RIGHTS.—
‘‘(i) IN GENERAL.—Not less than once a
year, at the request of the PDP sponsor, the
pharmacy benefit manager shall allow for an
audit of the pharmacy benefit manager to
ensure compliance with all terms and conditions under the written agreement described
in this paragraph and the accuracy of information reported under subparagraph (C).
‘‘(ii) AUDITOR.—The PDP sponsor shall
have the right to select an auditor. The
pharmacy benefit manager shall not impose
any limitations on the selection of such
auditor.
‘‘(iii) PROVISION OF INFORMATION.—The
pharmacy benefit manager shall make available to such auditor all records, data, contracts, and other information necessary to
confirm the accuracy of information reported under subparagraph (C), subject to
reasonable restrictions on how such information must be reported to prevent redisclosure
of such information.
‘‘(iv) TIMING.—The pharmacy benefit manager must provide information under clause
(iii) and other information, data, and records
relevant to the audit to such auditor within
6 months of the initiation of the audit and
respond to requests for additional information from such auditor within 30 days after
the request for additional information.
‘‘(v) INFORMATION FROM AFFILIATES.—The
pharmacy benefit manager shall be responsible for providing to such auditor information required to be reported under subparagraph (C) or under clause (iii) of this subparagraph that is owned or held by an affiliate of such pharmacy benefit manager.
‘‘(2) ENFORCEMENT.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Each PDP sponsor
shall—
‘‘(i) disgorge to the Secretary any amounts
disgorged to the PDP sponsor by a pharmacy
benefit manager under paragraph (1)(A)(v);
‘‘(ii) require, in a written agreement with
any pharmacy benefit manager acting on behalf of such sponsor or affiliate of such pharmacy benefit manager, that such pharmacy
benefit manager or affiliate reimburse the
PDP sponsor for any civil money penalty imposed on the PDP sponsor as a result of the
failure of the pharmacy benefit manager or
affiliate to meet the requirements of paragraph (1) that are applicable to the pharmacy benefit manager or affiliate under the
agreement; and
‘‘(iii) require, in a written agreement with
any such pharmacy benefit manager acting
on behalf of such sponsor or affiliate of such
pharmacy benefit manager, that such pharmacy benefit manager or affiliate be subject
to punitive remedies for breach of contract
for failure to comply with the requirements
applicable under paragraph (1).
‘‘(B) REPORTING OF ALLEGED VIOLATIONS.—
The Secretary shall make available and
maintain a mechanism for manufacturers,
PDP sponsors, pharmacies, and other entities that have contractual relationships with
pharmacy benefit managers or affiliates of
such pharmacy benefit managers to report,
on a confidential basis, alleged violations of
paragraph (1)(A) or subparagraph (C).
‘‘(C) ANTI-RETALIATION AND ANTI-COERCION.—Consistent with applicable Federal or
State law, a PDP sponsor shall not—
‘‘(i) retaliate against an individual or entity for reporting an alleged violation under
subparagraph (B); or
‘‘(ii) coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with the ability of an individual or entity to report any such alleged violations.
‘‘(3) CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Each PDP sponsor shall
furnish to the Secretary (at a time and in a

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

manner specified by the Secretary) an annual certification of compliance with this
subsection, as well as such information as
the Secretary determines necessary to carry
out this subsection.
‘‘(B)
IMPLEMENTATION.—Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, the Secretary
may implement this paragraph by program
instruction or otherwise.
‘‘(4) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in
this subsection shall be construed as—
‘‘(A) prohibiting flat dispensing fees or reimbursement or payment for ingredient
costs (including customary, industry-standard discounts directly related to drug acquisition that are retained by pharmacies or
wholesalers) to entities that acquire or dispense prescription drugs; or
‘‘(B) modifying regulatory requirements or
sub-regulatory program instruction or guidance related to pharmacy payment, reimbursement, or dispensing fees.
‘‘(5) STANDARD FORMATS.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than June 1,
2027, the Secretary shall specify standard,
machine-readable formats for pharmacy benefit managers to submit annual reports required under paragraph (1)(C)(i).
‘‘(B)
IMPLEMENTATION.—Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, the Secretary
may implement this paragraph by program
instruction or otherwise.
‘‘(6) CONFIDENTIALITY.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Information disclosed
by a pharmacy benefit manager, an affiliate
of a pharmacy benefit manager, a PDP sponsor, or a pharmacy under this subsection
that is not otherwise publicly available or
available for purchase shall not be disclosed
by the Secretary or a PDP sponsor receiving
the information, except that the Secretary
may disclose the information for the following purposes:
‘‘(i) As the Secretary determines necessary
to carry out this part.
‘‘(ii) To permit the Comptroller General to
review the information provided.
‘‘(iii) To permit the Director of the Congressional Budget Office to review the information provided.
‘‘(iv) To permit the Executive Director of
the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission
to review the information provided.
‘‘(v) To the Attorney General for the purposes of conducting oversight and enforcement under this title.
‘‘(vi) To the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services in
accordance with its authorities under the Inspector General Act of 1978 (section 406 of
title 5, United States Code), and other applicable statutes.
‘‘(B) RESTRICTION ON USE OF INFORMATION.—
The Secretary, the Comptroller General, the
Director of the Congressional Budget Office,
and the Executive Director of the Medicare
Payment Advisory Commission shall not report on or disclose information disclosed
pursuant to subparagraph (A) to the public
in a manner that would identify—
‘‘(i) a specific pharmacy benefit manager,
affiliate, pharmacy, manufacturer, wholesaler, PDP sponsor, or plan; or
‘‘(ii) contract prices, rebates, discounts, or
other remuneration for specific drugs in a
manner that may allow the identification of
specific contracting parties or of such specific drugs.
‘‘(7) DEFINITIONS.—For purposes of this subsection:
term
‘affiliate’
‘‘(A)
AFFILIATE.—The
means, with respect to any pharmacy benefit
manager or PDP sponsor, any entity that, directly or indirectly—
‘‘(i) owns or is owned by, controls or is controlled by, or is otherwise related in any
ownership structure to such pharmacy benefit manager or PDP sponsor; or

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1281

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

‘‘(ii) acts as a contractor, principal, or
agent to such pharmacy benefit manager or
PDP sponsor, insofar as such contractor,
principal, or agent performs any of the functions described under subparagraph (C).
‘‘(B) BONA FIDE SERVICE FEE.—The term
‘bona fide service fee’ means a fee that is reflective of the fair market value (as specified
by the Secretary, through notice and comment rulemaking) for a bona fide, itemized
service actually performed on behalf of an
entity, that the entity would otherwise perform (or contract for) in the absence of the
service arrangement and that is not passed
on in whole or in part to a client or customer, whether or not the entity takes title
to the drug. Such fee must be a flat dollar
amount and shall not be directly or indirectly based on, or contingent upon—
‘‘(i) drug price, such as wholesale acquisition cost or drug benchmark price (such as
average wholesale price);
‘‘(ii) the amount of discounts, rebates, fees,
or other direct or indirect remuneration
with respect to covered part D drugs dispensed to enrollees in a prescription drug
plan, except as permitted pursuant to paragraph (1)(A)(ii);
‘‘(iii) coverage or formulary placement decisions or the volume or value of any referrals or business generated between the parties to the arrangement; or
‘‘(iv) any other amounts or methodologies
prohibited by the Secretary.
‘‘(C) PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGER.—The
term ‘pharmacy benefit manager’ means any
person or entity that, either directly or
through an intermediary, acts as a price negotiator or group purchaser on behalf of a
PDP sponsor or prescription drug plan, or
manages the prescription drug benefits provided by such sponsor or plan, including the
processing and payment of claims for prescription drugs, the performance of drug utilization review, the processing of drug prior
authorization requests, the adjudication of
appeals or grievances related to the prescription drug benefit, contracting with network
pharmacies, controlling the cost of covered
part D drugs, or the provision of related
services. Such term includes any person or
entity that carries out one or more of the activities described in the preceding sentence,
irrespective of whether such person or entity
calls itself a ‘pharmacy benefit manager’.’’.
(2) MA–PD PLANS.—Section 1857(f)(3) of the
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–27(f)(3)),
as amended by section 6223(d)(2), is amended
by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
‘‘(G) REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO PHARMACY
BENEFIT MANAGERS.—For plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2028, section
1860D–12(h).’’.
(3) NONAPPLICATION OF PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT.—Chapter 35 of title 44, United
States Code, shall not apply to the implementation of this subsection.
(4) FUNDING.—
(A) SECRETARY.—In addition to amounts
otherwise available, there is appropriated to
the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services Program Management Account, out of
any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $113,000,000 for fiscal year 2026, to
remain available until expended, to carry
out this subsection.
(B) OIG.—In addition to amounts otherwise
available, there is appropriated to the Inspector General of the Department of Health
and Human Services, out of any money in
the Treasury not otherwise appropriated,
$20,000,000 for fiscal year 2026, to remain
available until expended, to carry out this
subsection.
(b) GAO STUDY AND REPORT ON PRICE-RELATED COMPENSATION ACROSS THE SUPPLY
CHAIN.—

PO 00000

Frm 00107

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(1) STUDY.—The Comptroller General of the
United States (in this subsection referred to
as the ‘‘Comptroller General’’) shall conduct
a study describing the use of compensation
and payment structures related to a prescription drug’s price within the retail prescription drug supply chain in part D of title
XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.
1395w–101 et seq.). Such study shall summarize information from Federal agencies and
industry experts, to the extent available,
with respect to the following:
(A) The type, magnitude, other features
(such as the pricing benchmarks used), and
prevalence of compensation and payment
structures related to a prescription drug’s
price, such as calculating fee amounts as a
percentage of a prescription drug’s price, between intermediaries in the prescription
drug supply chain, including—
(i) pharmacy benefit managers;
(ii) PDP sponsors offering prescription
drug plans and Medicare Advantage organizations offering MA–PD plans;
(iii) drug wholesalers;
(iv) pharmacies;
(v) manufacturers;
(vi) pharmacy services administrative organizations;
(vii) brokers, auditors, consultants, and
other entities that—
(I) advise PDP sponsors offering prescription drug plans and Medicare Advantage organizations offering MA–PD plans regarding
pharmacy benefits; or
(II) review PDP sponsor and Medicare Advantage organization contracts with pharmacy benefit managers; and
(viii) other service providers that contract
with any of the entities described in clauses
(i) through (vii) that may use price-related
compensation and payment structures, such
as rebate aggregators (or other entities that
negotiate or process price concessions on behalf of pharmacy benefit managers, plan
sponsors, or pharmacies).
(B) The primary business models and compensation structures for each category of
intermediary described in subparagraph (A).
(C) Variation in price-related compensation structures between affiliated entities
(such as entities with common ownership, either full or partial, and subsidiary relationships) and unaffiliated entities.
(D) Potential conflicts of interest among
contracting entities related to the use of prescription drug price-related compensation
structures, such as the potential for fees or
other payments set as a percentage of a prescription drug’s price to advantage formulary selection, distribution, or purchasing
of prescription drugs with higher prices.
(E) Notable differences, if any, in the use
and level of price-based compensation structures over time and between different market segments, such as under part D of title
XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.
1395w–101 et seq.) and the Medicaid program
under title XIX of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et
seq.).
(F) The effects of drug price-related compensation structures and alternative compensation structures on Federal health care
programs and program beneficiaries, including with respect to cost-sharing, premiums,
Federal outlays, biosimilar and generic drug
adoption and utilization, drug shortage
risks, and the potential for fees set as a percentage of a drug’s price to advantage the
formulary selection, distribution, or purchasing of drugs with higher prices.
(G) Other issues determined to be relevant
and appropriate by the Comptroller General.
(2) REPORT.—Not later than 2 years after
the date of enactment of this section, the
Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report containing the results of the

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1282

study conducted under paragraph (1), together with recommendations for such legislation and administrative action as the
Comptroller General determines appropriate.
(c) MEDPAC REPORTS ON AGREEMENTS WITH
PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGERS WITH RESPECT
TO PRESCRIPTION DRUG PLANS AND MA-PD
PLANS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Medicare Payment
Advisory Commission shall submit to Congress the following reports:
(A) INITIAL REPORT.—Not later than the
first March 15 occurring after the date that
is 2 years after the date on which the Secretary makes the data available to the Commission, a report regarding agreements with
pharmacy benefit managers with respect to
prescription drug plans and MA–PD plans.
Such report shall include, to the extent practicable—
(i) a description of trends and patterns, including relevant averages, totals, and other
figures for the types of information submitted;
(ii) an analysis of any differences in agreements and their effects on plan enrollee outof-pocket spending and average pharmacy reimbursement, and other impacts; and
(iii) any recommendations the Commission
determines appropriate.
(B) FINAL REPORT.—Not later than 2 years
after the date on which the Commission submits the initial report under subparagraph
(A), a report describing any changes with respect to the information described in subparagraph (A) over time, together with any
recommendations the Commission determines appropriate.
(2) FUNDING.—In addition to amounts otherwise available, there is appropriated to the
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission,
out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $1,000,000 for fiscal year
2026, to remain available until expended, to
carry out this subsection.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SEC. 6225. REQUIRING A SEPARATE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER AND AN ATTESTATION FOR EACH OFF-CAMPUS OUTPATIENT DEPARTMENT OF A PROVIDER.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1833(t) of the So-

cial Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(t)) is
amended by adding at the end the following
new paragraph:
‘‘(23) USE OF UNIQUE HEALTH IDENTIFIERS;
ATTESTATION.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—No payment may be
made under this subsection (or under an applicable payment system pursuant to paragraph (21)) for items and services furnished
on or after January 1, 2028, by an off-campus
outpatient department of a provider (as defined in subparagraph (C)) unless—
‘‘(i) such department has obtained, and
such items and services are billed under, a
National Provider Identifier that is separate
from such identifier for such provider;
‘‘(ii) such provider has submitted to the
Secretary, during the 2-year period ending
on the date such items and services are so
furnished, an initial provider-based status
attestation that such department is compliant with the requirements described in section 413.65 of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations (or a successor regulation), which,
until the Secretary establishes the process
described in subparagraph (B), may include
an attestation submitted in accordance with
paragraph (b)(3) of such section (as in effect
on the date of enactment of this paragraph);
and
‘‘(iii) after such provider has submitted an
attestation under clause (ii), such provider
has submitted a subsequent attestation
within the timeframe specified by the Secretary.
‘‘(B) PROCESS FOR SUBMISSION AND REVIEW.—

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

‘‘(i) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall,
through notice and comment rulemaking, establish a process for each provider with an
off-campus outpatient department of a provider to submit an initial and subsequent attestation pursuant to clauses (ii) and (iii),
respectively, of subparagraph (A), and for the
Secretary to review each such attestation
and determine, through site visits, remote
audits, or other means (as determined appropriate by the Secretary), whether such department is compliant with the requirements described in such subparagraph.
‘‘(ii) FUNDING.—In addition to amounts
otherwise available, there is appropriated to
the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services Program Management Account for fiscal
year 2026, out of any amounts in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $20,000,000,
to remain available until expended, for purposes of carrying out this subparagraph.
‘‘(C) OFF-CAMPUS OUTPATIENT DEPARTMENT
OF A PROVIDER DEFINED.—For purposes of this
paragraph, the term ‘off-campus outpatient
department of a provider’ means a department of a provider (as defined in section
413.65 of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations, or any successor regulation) that is
not located—
‘‘(i) on the campus (as defined in such section) of such provider; or
‘‘(ii) within the distance (described in such
definition of campus) from a remote location
of a hospital facility (as defined in such section).’’.
(b) HHS OIG ANALYSIS.—Not later than
January 1, 2030, the Inspector General of the
Department of Health and Human Services
shall submit to Congress—
(1) an analysis of the process established
by the Secretary of Health and Human Services to conduct the reviews and determinations described in section 1833(t)(23)(B) of the
Social Security Act, as added by subsection
(a) of this section; and
(2) recommendations based on such analysis, as the Inspector General determines appropriate.
SEC. 6226. REVISING PHASE-IN OF MEDICARE
CLINICAL LABORATORY TEST PAYMENT CHANGES.
(a) REVISED PHASE-IN OF REDUCTIONS FROM
PRIVATE PAYOR RATE IMPLEMENTATION.—Sec-

tion 1834A(b)(3) of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1395m–1(b)(3)) is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ‘‘2028’’
and inserting ‘‘2029’’; and
(2) in subparagraph (B)—
(A) in clause (ii), by striking ‘‘2025 and for
the period beginning on January 1, 2026, and
ending on January 30, 2026’’ and inserting
‘‘2026’’; and
(B) in clause (iii), by striking ‘‘the period
beginning on January 31, 2026, and ending on
December 31, 2026, and for each of 2027 and
2028’’ and inserting ‘‘each of 2027 through
2029’’.
(b) REVISED DATA COLLECTION PERIOD FOR
REPORTING OF PRIVATE SECTOR PAYMENT
RATES FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF MEDICARE
PAYMENT RATES.—Section 1834A(a)(4)(B) of
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m–
1(a)(4)(B)) is amended by striking ‘‘2019’’ each
place it appears and inserting ‘‘2025’’ in each
such place.
(c) REVISED REPORTING PERIOD FOR REPORTING OF PRIVATE SECTOR PAYMENT RATES
FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF MEDICARE PAYMENT
RATES.—Section 1834A(a)(1)(B) of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m–1(a)(1)(B)) is
amended—
(1) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘January 31’’
and inserting ‘‘April 30’’; and
(2) in clause (ii), by striking ‘‘February 1,
2026, and ending April 30, 2026’’ and inserting
‘‘May 1, 2026, and ending July 31, 2026’’.
(d)
IMPLEMENTATION.—Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, the Secretary of

PO 00000

Frm 00108

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Health and Human Services may implement
the amendments made by this section by
program instruction or otherwise.
SEC. 6227. MEDICARE SEQUESTRATION.

Section 251A(6) of the Balanced Budget and
Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2
U.S.C. 901a(6)) is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (D), by striking ‘‘such
that,’’ and all that follows and inserting
‘‘such that the payment reduction shall be
2.0 percent for such fiscal year.’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(F) On the date on which the President
submits the budget under section 1105 of title
31, United States Code, for fiscal year 2033,
the President shall order a sequestration of
payments for the Medicare programs specified in section 256(d), effective upon issuance,
such that, notwithstanding the 2 percent
limit specified in subparagraph (A) for such
payments—
‘‘(i) with respect to the first 5 months in
which such order is effective for such fiscal
year, the payment reduction shall be 2.0 percent; and
‘‘(ii) with respect to the last 7 months in
which such order is effective for such fiscal
year, the payment reduction shall be 0 percent.’’.
SEC. 6228. MEDICARE IMPROVEMENT FUND.

Section 1898(b)(1) of the Social Security
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395iii(b)(1)) is amended by
striking
‘‘$1,403,000,000’’
and
inserting
‘‘$2,062,000,000’’.
TITLE III—HUMAN SERVICES
SEC. 6301. SEXUAL RISK AVOIDANCE EDUCATION
EXTENSION.

Section 510 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 710) is amended—
(1) in subsection (a)—
(A) in paragraph (1)—
(i) by striking ‘‘2025, and for the period beginning on October 1, 2025, and ending on
January 30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘2026, and for
the period beginning on October 1, 2026, and
ending on December 31, 2026’’; and
(ii) by striking ‘‘fiscal year 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘fiscal year 2027’’; and
(B) in paragraph (2)—
(i) in subparagraph (A)—
(I) by striking ‘‘through 2025’’ and inserting ‘‘through 2026’’; and
(II) by striking ‘‘fiscal year 2026’’ each
place it appears and inserting ‘‘fiscal year
2027’’; and
(ii) in subparagraph (B)(i), by striking
‘‘2026’’ and inserting ‘‘2027’’; and
(2) in subsection (f)(1) by striking ‘‘2025,
and for the period beginning on October 1,
2025, and ending on January 30, 2026, an
amount equal to the pro rata portion of the
amount appropriated for the corresponding
period for fiscal year 2025’’ and inserting
‘‘2026, and for the period beginning on October 1, 2026, and ending on December 31, 2026,
an amount equal to the pro rata portion of
the amount appropriated for the corresponding period for fiscal year 2026’’.
SEC.

6302.

PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY
CATION EXTENSION.

EDU-

Section 513 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 713) is amended—
(1) in subsection (a)(1)—
(A) in subparagraph (A), in the matter preceding clause (i), by striking ‘‘2025, and for
the period beginning on October 1, 2025, and
ending on January 30, 2026’’ and inserting
‘‘2026, and for the period beginning on October 1, 2026, and ending on December 31, 2026’’;
and
(B) in subparagraph (B)(i), by striking ‘‘fiscal years 2024 and 2025, and for the period beginning on October 1, 2025, and ending on
January 30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘fiscal years
2025 and 2026, and for the period beginning on
October 1, 2026, and ending on December 31,
2026’’;

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

(2) in subsection (c)(3), by striking ‘‘2026’’
and inserting ‘‘2027’’; and
(3) in subsection (f), by striking ‘‘2025, and
for the period beginning on October 1, 2025,
and ending on January 30, 2026, an amount
equal to the pro rata portion of the amount
appropriated for the corresponding period for
fiscal year 2025’’ and inserting ‘‘2026, and for
the period beginning on October 1, 2026, and
ending on December 31, 2026, an amount
equal to the pro rata portion of the amount
appropriated for the corresponding period for
fiscal year 2026’’.
SEC. 6303. EXTENSION OF FUNDING FOR FAMILYTO-FAMILY HEALTH INFORMATION
CENTERS.

Section 501(c)(1)(A) of the Social Security
Act (42 U.S.C. 701(c)(1)(A)) is amended—
(1) in clause (viii), by striking ‘‘for fiscal
year 2025’’ and inserting ‘‘for each of fiscal
years 2025 and 2026’’; and
(2) in clause (ix), by striking ‘‘October 1,
2025, and ending on January 30, 2026, an
amount equal to the pro rata portion of the
amount appropriated for fiscal year 2025’’
and inserting ‘‘October 1, 2026, and ending on
December 31, 2026, an amount equal to the
pro rata portion of the amount appropriated
for fiscal year 2026’’.
SEC. 6304. EXTENSION OF THE TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE FOR NEEDY FAMILIES
PROGRAM.

Activities authorized by part A of title IV
of the Social Security Act (other than under
section 403(c) or 418 of such Act) and section
1108(b) of the Social Security Act shall continue through December 31, 2026, in the manner authorized for fiscal year 2025, and out of
any money in the Treasury of the United
States not otherwise appropriated, there are
hereby appropriated such sums as may be
necessary for such purpose.
TITLE IV—PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER
EXTENDERS
Subtitle A—Extensions

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SEC. 6401. EXTENSION FOR COMMUNITY HEALTH
CENTERS, NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS, AND TEACHING HEALTH
CENTERS THAT OPERATE GME PROGRAMS.
(a) EXTENSION FOR COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS.—Section 10503(b)(1) of the Patient Pro-

tection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C.
254b–2(b)(1)) is amended by striking subparagraphs (H), (I), (J), and (K) and inserting the
following:
‘‘(H) $4,236,712,328 for fiscal year 2024;
‘‘(I) $4,295,287,671 for fiscal year 2025;
‘‘(J) $4,600,000,000 for fiscal year 2026; and
‘‘(K) $1,159,452,055 for the period beginning
on October 1, 2026, and ending on December
31, 2026; and’’.
(b) EXTENSION FOR THE NATIONAL HEALTH
SERVICE CORPS.—Section 10503(b)(2) of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
(42 U.S.C. 254b–2(b)(2)) is amended by striking
subparagraphs (I), (J), (K), and (L) and inserting the following:
‘‘(I) $341,208,605 for fiscal year 2024;
‘‘(J) $349,736,600 for fiscal year 2025;
‘‘(K) $350,000,000 for fiscal year 2026; and
‘‘(L) $88,219,178 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2026, and ending on December 31,
2026.’’.
(c) TEACHING HEALTH CENTERS THAT OPERATE GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS.—Section 340H(g)(1) of the Public
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256h(g)(1)) is
amended by striking subparagraphs (D), (E),
(F), and (G) and inserting the following: ‘‘
‘‘(D) $168,915,878 for fiscal year 2024;
‘‘(E) $181,563,574 for fiscal year 2025;
‘‘(F) $225,000,000 for fiscal year 2026;
‘‘(G) $250,000,000 for fiscal year 2027;
‘‘(H) $275,000,000 for fiscal year 2028; and
‘‘(I) $300,000,000 for fiscal year 2029.’’.
(d) APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.—Amounts
appropriated pursuant to the amendments

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1283

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

made by this section shall be subject to the
requirements contained in Public Law 118–47
for funds for programs authorized under sections 330 through 340 of the Public Health
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b et seq.).
(e) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.—Section
3014(h)(4) of title 18, United States Code, is
amended by striking ‘‘and section 6101(d) of
the Continuing Appropriations, Agriculture,
Legislative Branch, Military Construction
and Veterans Affairs, and Extensions Act,
2026’’ and inserting ‘‘section 6101(d) of the
Continuing
Appropriations,
Agriculture,
Legislative Branch, Military Construction
and Veterans Affairs, and Extensions Act,
2026, and section 6401(d) of the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2026’’.
SEC. 6402. EXTENSION OF SPECIAL DIABETES
PROGRAMS.
(a) EXTENSION OF SPECIAL DIABETES PROGRAMS
FOR
TYPE I DIABETES.—Section

330B(b)(2) of the Public Health Service Act
(42 U.S.C. 254c–2(b)(2)) is amended by striking
subparagraphs (E), (F), (G), and (H) and inserting the following:
‘‘(E) $155,619,196 for fiscal year 2024, to remain available until expended;
‘‘(F) $159,228,188 for fiscal year 2025, to remain available until expended;
‘‘(G) $200,000,000 for fiscal year 2026, to remain available until expended; and
‘‘(H) $50,410,959 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2026, and ending on December 31,
2026, to remain available until expended.’’.
(b) EXTENDING FUNDING FOR SPECIAL DIABETES
PROGRAMS
FOR
INDIANS.—Section
330C(c)(2) of the Public Health Service Act
(42 U.S.C. 254c–3(c)(2)) is amended by striking
subparagraphs (E), (F), (G), and (H) and inserting the following:
‘‘(E) $155,619,196 for fiscal year 2024, to remain available until expended;
‘‘(F) $159,228,188 for fiscal year 2025, to remain available until expended;
‘‘(G) $200,000,000 for fiscal year 2026, to remain available until expended; and
‘‘(H) $50,410,959 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2026, and ending on December 31,
2026, to remain available until expended.’’.
SEC. 6403. EXTENSION OF NATIONAL HEALTH SECURITY PROGRAMS.

(a) Section 319(e)(8) of the Public Health
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d(e)(8)) is amended
by striking ‘‘January 30, 2026’’ and inserting
‘‘December 31, 2026’’.
(b) Section 319L(e)(1)(D) of the Public
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d–
7e(e)(1)(D)) is amended by striking ‘‘January
30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘December 31, 2026’’.
(c) Section 319L–1(b) of the Public Health
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d–7f(b)) is amended
by striking ‘‘January 30, 2026’’ and inserting
‘‘December 31, 2026’’.
(d) Section 2811A(g) of the Public Health
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300hh–10b(g)) is amended by striking ‘‘January 30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘December 31, 2026’’.
(e) Section 2811B(g)(1) of the Public Health
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300hh–10c(g)(1)) is
amended by striking ‘‘January 30, 2026’’ and
inserting ‘‘December 31, 2026’’.
(f) Section 2811C(g)(1) of the Public Health
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300hh–10d(g)(1)) is
amended by striking ‘‘January 30, 2026’’ and
inserting ‘‘December 31, 2026’’.
(g) Section 2812(c)(4)(B) of the Public
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300hh–
11(c)(4)(B)) is amended by striking ‘‘January
30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘December 31, 2026’’.
SEC. 6404. NO SURPRISES ACT IMPLEMENTATION.

Section 118(a) of division BB of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (Public
Law 116–260) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (1), by striking ‘‘January
30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘December 31, 2026’’;
and
(2) in paragraph (2)—

PO 00000

Frm 00109

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(A) by striking ‘‘$14,000,000’’ and inserting
‘‘$42,100,000’’; and
(B) by striking ‘‘January 30, 2026’’ and inserting ‘‘December 31, 2026’’.
Subtitle B—World Trade Center Health
Program
SEC.

6411.

9/11 RESPONDER AND SURVIVOR
HEALTH FUNDING CORRECTIONS.

(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 3351(a)(2)(A) of
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C.
300mm–61(a)(2)(A)) is amended—
(1) in clause (x), by striking ‘‘; and’’ and inserting a semicolon;
(2) by redesignating clause (xi) as clause
(xii); and
(3) by inserting after clause (x), the following:
‘‘(xi) for each of fiscal years 2026 through
2040—
‘‘(I) the amount determined under this subparagraph for the previous fiscal year multiplied by 1.07; multiplied by
‘‘(II) the ratio of—
‘‘(aa) the total number of individuals enrolled in the WTC Program on July 1 of such
previous fiscal year; to
‘‘(bb) the total number of individuals so enrolled on July 1 of the fiscal year prior to
such previous fiscal year; and’’.
(b) REPORT TO CONGRESS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 3 years
after the date of enactment of this Act, the
Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this subsection as the ‘‘Secretary’’) shall conduct an assessment of anticipated budget authority and outlays of
the World Trade Center Health Program (referred to in this subsection as the ‘‘Program’’) through the duration of the Program
and submit a report summarizing such assessment to—
(A) the Speaker and minority leader of the
House of Representatives;
(B) the majority and minority leaders of
the Senate;
(C) the Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions and the Committee on
the Budget of the Senate; and
(D) the Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Committee on the Budget of
the House of Representatives.
(2) INCLUSIONS.—The report required under
paragraph (1) shall include—
(A) a projection of Program budgetary
needs on a per-fiscal year basis through fiscal year 2090;
(B) a review of Program modeling for each
of fiscal years 2017 through the fiscal year
prior to the fiscal year in which the report is
issued to assess how anticipated budgetary
needs compared to actual expenditures;
(C) an assessment of the projected budget
authority and expenditures of the Program
through fiscal year 2090 by comparing—
(i) such projected authority and expenditures resulting from application of section
3351(a)(2)(A) of the Public Health Service Act
(42 U.S.C. 300mm–61(a)(2)(A)), as amended by
subsection (a); and
(ii) such projected authority and expenditures that would result if such section were
amended so that the formula under clause
(xi) of such section, as amended by subsection (a), were to be extended through fiscal year 2090; and
(D) any recommendations of the Secretary
to make changes to the formula under such
section 3351(a)(2)(A), as so amended, to fully
offset anticipated Program expenditures
through fiscal year 2090.
(c) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.—Title XXXIII
of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C.
300mm et seq.) is amended—
(1) in section 3352(d) (42 U.S.C. 300mm–
62(d)), by striking ‘‘Any amounts’’ and inserting ‘‘Any unobligated amounts’’;

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

H1284

(2) in section 3353(d) (42 U.S.C. 300mm–
63(d)), by striking ‘‘Any amounts’’ and inserting ‘‘Any unobligated amounts’’; and
(3) in section 3354(d) (42 U.S.C. 300mm–
64(d)), by striking ‘‘Any amounts’’ and inserting ‘‘Any unobligated amounts’’.
TITLE V—PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS
SEC. 6501. PREVENTING MATERNAL DEATHS.
(a) MATERNAL MORTALITY REVIEW COMMITTEES.—Section 317K(d) of the Public Health

Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b–12(d)) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (1)(A), by inserting ‘‘(including obstetricians and gynecologists)’’
after ‘‘clinical specialties’’; and
(2) in paragraph (3)(A)(i)—
(A) in subclause (I), by striking ‘‘as applicable’’ and inserting ‘‘if available’’; and
(B) in subclause (III), by striking ‘‘, as appropriate’’ and inserting ‘‘and coordinating
with individuals responsible for certifying
deaths to improve the collection and quality
of death record reports, including by amending errors and missing or incomplete information to cause-of-death information on a
death certificate, as appropriate’’.
(b) MATERNAL MORTALITY.—Section 317K of
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C.
247b–12) is amended—
(1) by redesignating subsections (e) and (f)
as subsections (f) and (g), respectively; and
(2) by inserting after subsection (d) the following:
‘‘(e) BEST PRACTICES RELATING TO THE PREVENTION OF MATERNAL MORTALITY.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary, acting
through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall, in consultation with the Administrator of the
Health Resources and Services Administration, identify and disseminate to health care
providers, relevant professional societies,
and perinatal quality collaboratives, best
practices related to preventing maternal
morbidity and mortality, taking into consideration any relevant findings from other
Federal maternal health programs.
‘‘(2) FREQUENCY.—The Secretary, acting
through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall disseminate the best practices referred to in paragraph (1) not less than once per fiscal year.’’.
(c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—
Subsection (g) of section 317K of the Public
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b–12), as redesignated by subsection (b)(1), is amended
by striking ‘‘$58,000,000 for each of fiscal
years 2019 through 2023’’ and inserting
‘‘$100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2026
through 2030’’.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

SEC. 6502. ORGAN PROCUREMENT AND TRANSPLANTATION NETWORK.

Section 372 of the Public Health Service
Act (42 U.S.C. 274) is amended—
(1) in subsection (b)(2)—
(A) by moving the margins of subparagraphs (M) through (O) 2 ems to the left;
(B) in subparagraph (A)—
(i) in clause (i), by striking ‘‘, and’’ and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(ii) in clause (ii), by striking the comma at
the end and inserting a semicolon;
(C) in subparagraph (C), by striking ‘‘twenty-four-hour telephone service’’ and inserting ‘‘24-hour telephone or information technology service’’;
(D) in each of subparagraphs (B) through
(M), by striking the comma at the end and
inserting a semicolon;
(E) in subparagraph (N), by striking
‘‘transportation, and’’ and inserting ‘‘transportation;’’;
(F) in subparagraph (O), by striking the period and inserting a semicolon; and
(G) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(P) encourage the integration of electronic health records systems through appli-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

cation programming interfaces (or successor
technologies) among hospitals, organ procurement organizations, and transplant centers, including the use of automated electronic hospital referrals and the grant of remote, electronic access to hospital electronic health records of potential donors by
organ procurement organizations, in a manner that complies with the privacy regulations promulgated under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996, at part 160 of title 45, Code of Federal
Regulations, and subparts A, C, and E of part
164 of such title (or any successor regulations); and
‘‘(Q) consider establishing a dashboard to
display the number of transplants performed,
the types of transplants performed, the number and types of organs that entered the
Organ Procurement and Transplantation
Network system and failed to be transplanted, and other appropriate statistics,
which should be updated more frequently
than annually.’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(d) REGISTRATION FEES.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary may collect registration fees from any member of
the Organ Procurement and Transplantation
Network for each transplant candidate such
member places on the list described in subsection (b)(2)(A)(i). Such registration fees
shall be collected and distributed only to
support the operation of the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network. Such
registration fees are authorized to remain
available until expended.
‘‘(2) COLLECTION.—The Secretary may collect the registration fees under paragraph (1)
directly or through awards made under subsection (b)(1)(A).
‘‘(3) DISTRIBUTION.—Any amounts collected
under this subsection shall—
‘‘(A) be credited to the currently applicable appropriation, account, or fund of the Department of Health and Human Services as
discretionary offsetting collections; and
‘‘(B) be available, only to the extent and in
the amounts provided in advance in appropriations Acts, to distribute such fees among
awardees described in subsection (b)(1)(A).
‘‘(4) TRANSPARENCY.—The Secretary shall—
‘‘(A) promptly post on the website of the
Organ Procurement and Transplantation
Network—
‘‘(i) the amount of registration fees collected under this subsection from each member of the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network; and
‘‘(ii) a list of activities such fees are used
to support; and
‘‘(B) update the information posted pursuant to subparagraph (A), as applicable for
each calendar quarter for which fees are collected under paragraph (1).
‘‘(5) GAO REVIEW.—Not later than 2 years
after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Comptroller General of the
United States shall, to the extent data are
available—
‘‘(A) conduct a review concerning the activities under this subsection; and
‘‘(B) submit to the Committee on Health,
Education, Labor, and Pensions and the
Committee on Finance of the Senate and the
Committee on Energy and Commerce of the
House of Representatives, a report on such
review, including related recommendations,
as applicable.
‘‘(6) SUNSET.—The authority to collect registration fees under paragraph (1) shall expire on the date that is 3 years after the date
of enactment of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026.’’.
SEC. 6503. HONOR OUR LIVING DONORS.
(a) NO CONSIDERATION OF INCOME OF ORGAN
RECIPIENT.—Section 377 of the Public Health

Service Act (42 U.S.C. 274f) is amended—

PO 00000

Frm 00110

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(1) by redesignating subsections (c)
through (f) as subsections (d) through (g), respectively;
(2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following:
‘‘(c) NO CONSIDERATION OF INCOME OF ORGAN
RECIPIENT.—The recipient of a grant under
this section, in providing reimbursement to
a donating individual through such grant,
shall not give any consideration to the income of the organ recipient.’’; and
(3) in subsection (f), as so redesignated—
(A) in paragraph (1), by striking ‘‘subsection (c)(1)’’ and inserting ‘‘subsection
(d)(1)’’; and
(B) in paragraph (2), by striking ‘‘subsection (c)(2)’’ and inserting ‘‘subsection
(d)(2)’’.
(b) REMOVAL OF EXPECTATION OF PAYMENTS
BY ORGAN RECIPIENTS.—Section 377(e) of the
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 274f(e)),
as redesignated by subsection (a)(1), is
amended—
(1) in paragraph (1), by adding ‘‘or’’ at the
end;
(2) in paragraph (2), by striking ‘‘; or’’ and
inserting a period; and
(3) by striking paragraph (3).
(c) ANNUAL REPORT.—Section 377 of the
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 274f), as
amended by subsections (a) and (b), is
amended by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(h) ANNUAL REPORT.—Not later than December 31 of each year, beginning in fiscal
year 2027, the Secretary shall—
‘‘(1) prepare, submit to the Congress, and
make public a report on whether grants
under this section provided adequate funding
during the preceding fiscal year to reimburse
all donating individuals participating in the
grant program under this section for all
qualifying expenses; and
‘‘(2) include in each such report—
‘‘(A) the estimated number of all donating
individuals participating in the grant program under this section who did not receive
reimbursement for all qualifying expenses
during the preceding fiscal year; and
‘‘(B) the total amount of funding that is estimated to be necessary to fully reimburse
all donating individuals participating in the
grant program under this section for all
qualifying expenses.’’.
SEC. 6504. PROGRAM FOR PEDIATRIC STUDIES OF
DRUGS.

Section 409I(d)(1) of the Public Health
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 284m(d)(1)) is amended
by striking ‘‘section,’’ and all that follows
through the period at the end and inserting
‘‘section, $25,000,000 for each of fiscal years
2026 through 2028.’’.
SEC. 6505. SICKLE CELL DISEASE PREVENTION
AND TREATMENT.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 1106(b) of the

Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300b–
5(b)) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (1)(A)(iii), by striking
‘‘prevention and treatment of sickle cell disease’’ and inserting ‘‘treatment of sickle cell
disease and the prevention and treatment of
complications of sickle cell disease’’;
(2) in paragraph (2)(D), by striking ‘‘prevention and treatment of sickle cell disease’’
and inserting ‘‘treatment of sickle cell disease and the prevention and treatment of
complications of sickle cell disease’’;
(3) in paragraph (3)—
(A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ‘‘enter
into a contract with’’ and inserting ‘‘make a
grant to, or enter into a contract or cooperative agreement with,’’; and
(B) in subparagraph (B), in each of clauses
(ii) and (iii), by striking ‘‘prevention and
treatment of sickle cell disease’’ and inserting ‘‘treatment of sickle cell disease and the
prevention and treatment of complications
of sickle cell disease’’; and

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

(4) in paragraph (6), by striking ‘‘$4,455,000
for each of fiscal years 2019 through 2023’’
and inserting ‘‘$8,205,000 for each of fiscal
years 2026 through 2030’’.
(b) SENSE OF CONGRESS.—It is the sense of
Congress that further research should be undertaken to expand the understanding of the
causes of, and to find cures for, heritable
blood disorders, including sickle cell disease.
SEC. 6506. LIFESPAN RESPITE CARE.

(a) DEFINITION OF FAMILY CAREGIVER.—Section 2901(5) of the Public Health Service Act
(42 U.S.C. 300ii(5)) is amended by striking
‘‘unpaid adult’’ and inserting ‘‘unpaid individual’’.
(b) FUNDING.—Section 2905 of the Public
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300ii–4) is
amended by striking ‘‘fiscal years 2020
through fiscal year 2024’’ and inserting ‘‘fiscal years 2026 through 2030’’.
SEC. 6507. PREEMIE.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(a) RESEARCH RELATING TO PRETERM LABOR
AND DELIVERY AND THE CARE, TREATMENT,
AND OUTCOMES OF PRETERM AND LOW BIRTHWEIGHT INFANTS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 3(e) of the Prematurity Research Expansion and Education
for Mothers who deliver Infants Early Act (42
U.S.C. 247b–4f(e)) is amended by striking ‘‘fiscal years 2019 through 2023’’ and inserting
‘‘fiscal years 2026 through 2030’’.
(2) TECHNICAL CORRECTION.—Effective as if
included in the enactment of the PREEMIE
Reauthorization Act of 2018 (Public Law 115–
328), section 2 of such Act is amended, in the
matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking
‘‘Section 2’’ and inserting ‘‘Section 3’’.
(b) INTERAGENCY WORKING GROUP.—Section
5(a) of the PREEMIE Reauthorization Act of
2018 (Public Law 115–328) is amended by
striking ‘‘The Secretary of Health and
Human Services, in collaboration with other
departments, as appropriate, may establish’’
and inserting ‘‘Not later than 18 months
after the date of the enactment of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in collaboration with other departments, as appropriate, shall establish’’.
(c) STUDY ON PRETERM BIRTHS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary of Health
and Human Services shall enter into appropriate arrangements with the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
under which the National Academies shall—
(A) not later than 30 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, convene a committee
of experts in maternal health to study premature births in the United States; and
(B) upon completion of the study under
subparagraph (A)—
(i) approve by consensus a report on the results of such study;
(ii) include in such report—
(I) an assessment of each of the topics listed in paragraph (2);
(II) the analysis required by paragraph (3);
and
(III) the raw data used to develop such report; and
(iii) not later than 24 months after the date
of enactment of this Act, transmit such report to—
(I) the Secretary of Health and Human
Services;
(II) the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives; and
(III) the Committee on Finance and the
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions of the Senate.
(2) ASSESSMENT TOPICS.—The topics listed
in this subsection are each of the following:
(A) The financial costs of premature birth
to society, including—
(i) an analysis of stays in neonatal intensive care units and the cost of such stays;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1285

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(ii) long-term costs of stays in such units
to society and the family involved post-discharge; and
(iii) health care costs for families post-discharge from such units (such as medications,
therapeutic services, co-payments for visits,
and specialty equipment).
(B) The factors that impact preterm birth
rates.
(C) Opportunities for earlier detection of
premature birth risk factors, including—
(i) opportunities to improve maternal and
infant health; and
(ii) opportunities for public health programs to provide support and resources for
parents in-hospital, in non-hospital settings,
and post-discharge.
(3) ANALYSIS.—The analysis required by
this subsection is an analysis of—
(A) targeted research strategies to develop
effective drugs, treatments, or interventions
to bring at-risk pregnancies to term;
(B) State and other programs’ best practices with respect to reducing premature
birth rates; and
(C) precision medicine and preventative
care approaches starting early in the life
course (including during pregnancy) with a
focus on behavioral and biological influences
on premature birth, child health, and the
trajectory of such approaches into adulthood.
SEC. 6508. DR. LORNA BREEN HEALTH CARE PROVIDER PROTECTION.
(a) DISSEMINATION OF BEST PRACTICES.—

Section 2 of the Dr. Lorna Breen Health Care
Provider Protection Act (Public Law 117–105)
is amended by striking ‘‘2 years’’ and inserting ‘‘5 years’’.
(b) EDUCATION AND AWARENESS INITIATIVE
ENCOURAGING USE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND
SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER SERVICES BY
HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS.—Section 3 of
the Dr. Lorna Breen Health Care Provider
Protection Act (Public Law 117–105) is
amended—
(1) in subsection (b), by inserting ‘‘and annually thereafter,’’ after ‘‘of this Act,’’; and
(2) in subsection (c), by striking ‘‘2022
through 2024’’ and inserting ‘‘2026 through
2030’’.
(c) PROGRAMS TO PROMOTE MENTAL HEALTH
AMONG THE HEALTH PROFESSIONAL WORKFORCE.—The second section 764 of the Public
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 294t), as added
by section 4 of the Dr. Lorna Breen Health
Care Provider Protection Act (Public Law
117–105), is amended—
(1) by redesignating such section 764 as section 764A;
(2) in subsection (a)(3)—
(A) by striking ‘‘to eligible entities in’’ and
inserting ‘‘to eligible entities that—
‘‘(A) are in’’;
(B) by striking the period and inserting ‘‘;
or’’; and
(C) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(B) have a focus on the reduction of administrative burden on health care workers.’’;
(3) in subsection (c), by inserting ‘‘not less
than’’ after ‘‘period of’’; and
(4) in subsection (f), by striking ‘‘2022
through 2024’’ and inserting ‘‘2026 through
2030’’.
TITLE VI—FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION
Subtitle A—Mikaela Naylon Give Kids a
Chance Act
SEC. 6601. RESEARCH INTO PEDIATRIC USES OF
DRUGS; ADDITIONAL AUTHORITIES
OF FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION REGARDING MOLECULARLY
TARGETED CANCER DRUGS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—
(1) ADDITIONAL ACTIVE INGREDIENT FOR APPLICATION
DRUG;
LIMITATION
REGARDING

PO 00000

Frm 00111

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

NOVEL-COMBINATION APPLICATION DRUG.—Sec-

tion 505B(a)(3) of the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355c(a)(3)) is
amended—
(A) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and
(C) as subparagraphs (C) and (D), respectively; and
(B) by striking subparagraph (A) and inserting the following:
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), the investigation described in
this paragraph is a molecularly targeted pediatric cancer investigation of—
‘‘(i) the drug or biological product for
which the application referred to in such
paragraph is submitted; or
‘‘(ii) such drug or biological product used
in combination with—
‘‘(I) an active ingredient of a drug or biological product—
‘‘(aa) for which an approved application
under section 505(j) under this Act or under
section 351(k) of the Public Health Service
Act is in effect; and
‘‘(bb) that is determined by the Secretary,
after consultation with the applicant, to be
part of the standard of care for treating a pediatric cancer; or
‘‘(II) an active ingredient of a drug or biological product—
‘‘(aa) for which an approved application
under section 505(b) of this Act or section
351(a) of the Public Health Service Act to
treat an adult cancer is in effect and is held
by the same person submitting the application under paragraph (1)(B); and
‘‘(bb) that is directed at a molecular target
that the Secretary determines to be substantially relevant to the growth or progression
of a pediatric cancer.
‘‘(B) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.—
‘‘(i) DESIGN OF INVESTIGATION.—A molecularly targeted pediatric cancer investigation
referred to in subparagraph (A) shall be designed to yield clinically meaningful pediatric study data that is gathered using appropriate formulations for each age group for
which the study is required, regarding dosing, safety, and preliminary efficacy to inform potential pediatric labeling.
‘‘(ii) LIMITATION.—An investigation described in subparagraph (A)(ii) may be required only if the drug or biological product
for which the application referred to in paragraph (1)(B) contains either—
‘‘(I) a single new active ingredient; or
‘‘(II) more than one active ingredient, if an
application for the combination of active ingredients has not previously been approved
but each active ingredient is in a drug product that has been previously approved to
treat an adult cancer.
‘‘(iii) RESULTS OF ALREADY-COMPLETED PRECLINICAL STUDIES OF APPLICATION DRUG.—
With respect to an investigation required
pursuant to paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary
may require the results of any completed
preclinical studies relevant to the initial pediatric study plan be submitted to the Secretary at the same time that the initial pediatric study plan required under subsection
(e)(1) is submitted.
‘‘(iv) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION REGARDING INACTIVE INGREDIENTS.—With respect to a combination of active ingredients referred to in
subparagraph (A)(ii), such subparagraph
shall not be construed as addressing the use
of inactive ingredients with such combination.’’.
(2) DETERMINATION OF APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS.—Section 505B(e)(1) of the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C.
355c(e)(1)) is amended by adding at the end

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1286

the following: ‘‘The Secretary shall determine whether subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (a)(1) applies with respect to an application before the date on which the applicant is required to submit the initial pediatric study plan under paragraph (2)(A).’’.
(3) CLARIFYING APPLICABILITY.—Section
505B(a)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355c(a)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(C) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—No application that is subject to the requirements of
subparagraph (B) shall be subject to the requirements of subparagraph (A), and no application (or supplement to an application)
that is subject to the requirements of subparagraph (A) shall be subject to the requirements of subparagraph (B).’’.
(4)
CONFORMING
AMENDMENTS.—Section
505B(a) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355c(a)) is amended—
(A) in paragraph (3)(C), as redesignated by
paragraph (1)(A) of this subsection, by striking ‘‘investigations described in this paragraph’’ and inserting ‘‘investigations referred to in subparagraph (A)’’; and
(B) in paragraph (3)(D), as redesignated by
paragraph (1)(A) of this subsection, by striking ‘‘the assessments under paragraph
(2)(B)’’ and inserting ‘‘the assessments required under paragraph (1)(A)’’.
(b) GUIDANCE.—The Secretary of Health
and Human Services, acting through the
Commissioner of Food and Drugs, shall—
(1) not later than 12 months after the date
of enactment of this Act, issue draft guidance on the implementation of the amendments made by subsection (a); and
(2) not later than 12 months after closing
the comment period on such draft guidance,
finalize such guidance.
(c) APPLICABILITY.—The amendments made
by this section apply with respect to any application under section 505(b) of the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C.
355(b)) and any application under section
351(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42
U.S.C. 262(a)), that is submitted on or after
the date that is 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
(d) REPORTS TO CONGRESS.—
(1) SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES.—Not later than 6 years after the date
of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of
Health and Human Services shall submit to
the Committee on Energy and Commerce of
the House of Representatives and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions of the Senate a report on the Secretary’s efforts, in coordination with industry, to ensure implementation of the amendments made by subsection (a).
(2) GAO STUDY AND REPORT.—
(A) STUDY.—Not later than 8 years after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall
conduct a study of the effectiveness of requiring assessments and investigations described in section 505B of the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C.355c), as
amended by subsection (a), in the development of drugs and biological products for pediatric cancer indications, including consideration of any benefits to, or burdens on, pediatric cancer drug development.
(B) FINDINGS.—Not later than 10 years after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the
House of Representatives and the Committee
on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of
the Senate a report containing the findings
of the study conducted under subparagraph
(A).
SEC. 6602. ENSURING COMPLETION OF PEDIATRIC STUDY REQUIREMENTS.
(a) EQUAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR PEDIATRIC
STUDY REQUIREMENTS.—Section 505B(d) of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. 355c(d)) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (1), by striking ‘‘Beginning
270’’ and inserting ‘‘NONCOMPLIANCE LETTER.—Beginning 270’’;
(2) in paragraph (2)—
(A) by striking ‘‘The drug or’’ and inserting ‘‘EFFECT OF NONCOMPLIANCE.—The drug
or’’; and
(B) by striking ‘‘(except that the drug or
biological product shall not be subject to action under section 303)’’ and inserting ‘‘(except that the drug or biological product shall
be subject to action under section 303 only if
such person demonstrated a lack of due diligence in satisfying the applicable requirement)’’; and
(3) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(3) LIMITATION.—The Secretary shall not
issue enforcement actions under section 303
for failures under this subsection in the case
of a drug or biological product that is no
longer marketed.’’.
(b) DUE DILIGENCE.—Section 505B(d) of the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21
U.S.C. 355c(d)), as amended by subsection (a),
is further amended by adding at the end the
following:
‘‘(4) DUE DILIGENCE.—Before the Secretary
may conclude that a person failed to submit
or otherwise meet a requirement as described in the matter preceding paragraph
(1), the Secretary shall—
‘‘(A) issue a noncompliance letter pursuant
to paragraph (1);
‘‘(B) provide such person with a 45-day period beginning on the date of receipt of such
noncompliance letter to respond in writing
as set forth in such paragraph; and
‘‘(C) after reviewing such written response,
determine whether the person demonstrated
a lack of due diligence in satisfying such requirement.’’.
(c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.—Section
303(f)(4)(A) of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 333(f)(4)(A)) is
amended by striking ‘‘or 505–1’’ and inserting
‘‘505–1, or 505B’’.
(d) TRANSITION RULE.—The Secretary of
Health and Human Services may take enforcement action under section 303 of the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21
U.S.C. 333) only for failures described in section 505B(d) of such Act (21 U.S.C. 355c(d))
that occur on or after the date that is 180
days after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 6603. FDA REPORT ON PREA ENFORCEMENT.

Section 508(b) of the Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act (21
U.S.C. 355c–1(b)) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (11), by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting ‘‘, including
an evaluation of compliance with deadlines
provided for in deferrals and deferral extensions;’’;
(2) in paragraph (15), by striking ‘‘and’’ at
the end;
(3) in paragraph (16), by striking the period
at the end and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(4) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(17) a listing of penalties, settlements, or
payments under section 303 of the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 353)
for failure to comply with requirements
under such section 505B, including, for each
penalty, settlement, or payment, the name
of the drug, the sponsor thereof, and the
amount of the penalty, settlement, or payment imposed.’’.
SEC. 6604. EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO ISSUE
PRIORITY REVIEW VOUCHERS TO
ENCOURAGE
TREATMENTS
FOR
RARE PEDIATRIC DISEASES.
(a) EXTENSION.—Paragraph (5) of section

529(b) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360ff(b)) is amended by
striking ‘‘December 20, 2024, unless’’ and all
that follows through the period at the end
and inserting ‘‘September 30, 2029.’’.

PO 00000

Frm 00112

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(b) USER FEE PAYMENT.—Section 529(c)(4)
of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. 360ff(c)(4)) is amended by striking
subparagraph (A) and inserting the following:
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—The priority review user
fee required by this subsection shall be due
upon the submission of a human drug application under section 505(b)(1) or section
351(a) of the Public Health Service Act for
which the priority review voucher is used.
All other user fees associated with the
human drug application shall be due as required by the Secretary or under applicable
law.’’.
(c) GAO REPORT ON EFFECTIVENESS OF
RARE PEDIATRIC DISEASE PRIORITY VOUCHER
AWARDS IN INCENTIVIZING RARE PEDIATRIC
DISEASE DRUG DEVELOPMENT.—
(1) GAO STUDY.—
(A) STUDY.—The Comptroller General of
the United States shall conduct a study of
the effectiveness of awarding rare pediatric
disease priority vouchers under section 529 of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. 360ff), as amended by subsection
(a), in the development of human drug products that treat or prevent rare pediatric diseases (as defined in such section 529).
(B) CONTENTS OF STUDY.—In conducting the
study under subparagraph (A), the Comptroller General shall examine the following:
(i) The indications for each drug or biological product that—
(I) is the subject of a rare pediatric disease
product application (as defined in section 529
of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. 360ff)) for which a priority review
voucher was awarded; and
(II) was approved under section 505 of the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (42
U.S.C. 355) or licensed under section 351 of
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262).
(ii) Whether, and to what extent, an unmet
need related to the treatment or prevention
of a rare pediatric disease was met through
the approval or licensure of such a drug or
biological product.
(iii) The size of the company to which a
priority review voucher was awarded under
section 529 of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360ff) for such a drug
or biological product.
(iv) The value of such priority review
voucher if transferred.
(v) Identification of each drug for which a
priority review voucher awarded under such
section 529 was used.
(vi) The size of the company using each
priority review voucher awarded under such
section 529.
(vii) The length of the period of time between the date on which a priority review
voucher was awarded under such section 529
and the date on which it was used.
(viii) Whether, and to what extent, an
unmet need related to the treatment or prevention of a rare pediatric disease was met
through the approval under section 505 of the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (42
U.S.C. 355) or licensure under section 351 of
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262)
of a drug for which a priority review voucher
was used.
(ix) Whether, and to what extent, companies were motivated by the availability of
priority review vouchers under section 529 of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. 360ff) to attempt to develop a drug
for a rare pediatric disease.
(x) Whether, and to what extent, pediatric
review vouchers awarded under such section
were successful in stimulating development
and expedited patient access to drug products for treatment or prevention of a rare pediatric disease that wouldn’t otherwise take
place without the incentive provided by such
vouchers.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

(xi) The impact of such priority review
vouchers on the workload, review process,
and public health prioritization efforts of the
Food and Drug Administration.
(xii) Any other incentives in Federal law
that exist for companies developing drugs or
biological products described in clause (i).
(2) REPORT ON FINDINGS.—Not later than 5
years after the date of the enactment of this
Act, the Comptroller General of the United
States shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Health,
Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate a report containing the findings of the
study conducted under paragraph (1).
SEC.

6605.

LIMITATIONS ON EXCLUSIVE APPROVAL OR LICENSURE OF ORPHAN
DRUGS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 527 of the Federal

Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C.
360cc) is amended—
(1) in subsection (a), in the matter following paragraph (2), by striking ‘‘same disease or condition’’ and inserting ‘‘same approved use or indication within such rare
disease or condition’’;
(2) in subsection (b)—
(A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1),
by striking ‘‘same rare disease or condition’’
and inserting ‘‘same approved use or indication for which such 7-year period applies to
such already approved or licensed drug’’; and
(B) in paragraph (1), by inserting ‘‘, relating to the approved use or indication,’’ after
‘‘the needs’’;
(3) in subsection (c)(1), by striking ‘‘same
rare disease or condition as the already approved drug’’ and inserting ‘‘same use or indication for which the already approved or
licensed drug was approved or licensed’’; and
(4) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(f) APPROVED USE OR INDICATION DEFINED.—In this section, the term ‘approved
use or indication’ means the use or indication approved under section 505 of this Act or
licensed under section 351 of the Public
Health Service Act for a drug designated
under section 526 for a rare disease or condition.’’.
(b) APPLICATION OF AMENDMENTS.—The
amendments made by subsection (a) shall
apply with respect to any drug designated
under section 526 of the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360bb), regardless of the date on which the drug was so designated, and regardless of the date on which
the drug was approved under section 505 of
such Act (21 U.S.C. 355) or licensed under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42
U.S.C. 262).
Subtitle B—United States-Abraham Accords
Cooperation and Security
SEC. 6611. ESTABLISHMENT OF ABRAHAM ACCORDS OFFICE WITHIN FOOD AND
DRUG ADMINISTRATION.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Chapter X of the Federal

Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 391
et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the
following:

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

‘‘SEC. 1015. ABRAHAM ACCORDS OFFICE.
‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary, acting

through the Commissioner of Food and
Drugs, shall establish within the Food and
Drug Administration an office, to be known
as the Abraham Accords Office, to be headed
by a director.
‘‘(b) OFFICE.—Not later than 2 years after
the date of enactment of this section, the
Secretary shall—
‘‘(1) in consultation with the governments
of Abraham Accords countries, as well as appropriate United States Government diplomatic and security personnel—
‘‘(A) select the location of the Abraham
Accords Office in an Abraham Accords country; and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1287

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

‘‘(B) establish such office; and
‘‘(2) assign to such office such personnel of
the Food and Drug Administration as the
Secretary determines necessary to carry out
the functions of such office.
Secretary,
acting
‘‘(c)
DUTIES.—The
through the Director of the Abraham Accords Office, shall—
‘‘(1) after the Abraham Accords Office is
established—
‘‘(A) as part of the Food and Drug Administration’s work to strengthen the international oversight of regulated commodities,
provide technical assistance to regulatory
partners in Abraham Accords countries on
strengthening regulatory oversight and converging regulatory requirements for the
oversight of regulated products, including
good manufacturing practices and other
issues relevant to manufacturing medical
products that are regulated by the Food and
Drug Administration; and
‘‘(B) facilitate interactions between the
Food and Drug Administration and interested parties in Abraham Accords countries,
including by sharing relevant information
regarding United States regulatory pathways with such parties, and facilitate feedback on the research, development, and manufacturing of products regulated in accordance with this Act; and
‘‘(2) carry out other functions and activities as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this section.
‘‘(d) ABRAHAM ACCORDS COUNTRY DEFINED.—In this section, the term ‘Abraham
Accords country’ means a country identified
by the Department of State as having signed
the Abraham Accords Declaration.
‘‘(e) NATIONAL SECURITY.—Nothing in this
section shall be construed to require any action inconsistent with a national security
recommendation provided by the Federal
Government.’’.
(b) REPORT TO CONGRESS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 3 years
after the date of enactment of this Act, the
Secretary of Health and Human Services
shall submit to the Congress a report on the
Abraham Accords Office, including—
(A) an evaluation of how the Office has advanced progress toward conformance with
Food and Drug Administration regulatory
requirements by manufacturers in the Abraham Accords countries;
(B) a numerical count of parties that the
Office has helped facilitate interactions or
feedback pursuant to section 1015(c)(1)(B) of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(as added by subsection (a));
(C) a summary of technical assistance provided to regulatory partners in Abraham Accords countries pursuant to subparagraph
(A) of such section 1015(c)(1); and
(D) recommendations for increasing and
improving coordination between the Food
and Drug Administration and entities in
Abraham Accords countries.
(2) ABRAHAM ACCORDS COUNTRY DEFINED.—
In this subsection, the term ‘‘Abraham Accords country’’ has the meaning given such
term in section 1015(d) of the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (as added by subsection (a)).
TITLE VII—LOWERING PRESCRIPTION
DRUG COSTS
SEC. 6701. OVERSIGHT OF PHARMACY BENEFIT
MANAGEMENT SERVICES.
(a) PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.—Title

XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42
U.S.C. 300gg et seq.) is amended—
(1) in part D (42 U.S.C. 300gg–111 et seq.), by
adding at the end the following new section:
‘‘SEC. 2799A–11. OVERSIGHT OF ENTITIES THAT
PROVIDE PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGEMENT SERVICES.
‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—For plan years begin-

ning on or after the date that is 30 months

PO 00000

Frm 00113

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

after the date of enactment of this section
(referred to in this subsection and subsection
(b) as the ‘effective date’), a group health
plan or a health insurance issuer offering
group health insurance coverage, or an entity providing pharmacy benefit management
services on behalf of such a plan or issuer,
shall not enter into a contract, including an
extension or renewal of a contract, entered
into on or after the effective date, with an
applicable entity unless such applicable entity agrees to—
‘‘(1) not limit or delay the disclosure of information to the group health plan (including such a plan offered through a health insurance issuer) in such a manner that prevents an entity providing pharmacy benefit
management services on behalf of a group
health plan or health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage from
making the reports described in subsection
(b); and
‘‘(2) provide the entity providing pharmacy
benefit management services on behalf of a
group health plan or health insurance issuer
relevant information necessary to make the
reports described in subsection (b).
‘‘(b) REPORTS.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—For plan years beginning
on or after the effective date, in the case of
any contract between a group health plan or
a health insurance issuer offering group
health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan and an entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services on
behalf of such plan or issuer, including an extension or renewal of such a contract, entered into on or after the effective date, the
entity providing pharmacy benefit management services on behalf of such a group
health plan or health insurance issuer, not
less frequently than every 6 months (or, at
the request of a group health plan, not less
frequently than quarterly, and under the
same conditions, terms, and cost of the semiannual report under this subsection), shall
submit to the group health plan a report in
accordance with this section. Each such report shall be made available to such group
health plan in plain language, in a machinereadable format, and as the Secretary may
determine, other formats. Each such report
shall include the information described in
paragraph (2).
‘‘(2) INFORMATION DESCRIBED.—For purposes
of paragraph (1), the information described
in this paragraph is, with respect to drugs
covered by a group health plan or group
health insurance coverage offered by a
health insurance issuer in connection with a
group health plan during each reporting period—
‘‘(A) in the case of a group health plan that
is offered by a specified large employer or
that is a specified large plan, and is not offered as health insurance coverage, or in the
case of health insurance coverage for which
the election under paragraph (3) is made for
the applicable reporting period—
‘‘(i) a list of drugs for which a claim was
filed and, with respect to each such drug on
such list—
‘‘(I) the contracted compensation paid by
the group health plan or health insurance
issuer for each covered drug (identified by
the National Drug Code) to the entity providing pharmacy benefit management services or other applicable entity on behalf of
the group health plan or health insurance
issuer;
‘‘(II) the contracted compensation paid to
the pharmacy, by any entity providing pharmacy benefit management services or other
applicable entity on behalf of the group
health plan or health insurance issuer, for
each covered drug (identified by the National
Drug Code);

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1288

‘‘(III) for each such claim, the difference
between the amount paid under subclause (I)
and the amount paid under subclause (II);
‘‘(IV) the proprietary name, established
name or proper name, and the National Drug
Code;
‘‘(V) for each claim for the drug (including
original prescriptions and refills) and for
each dosage unit of the drug for which a
claim was filed, the type of dispensing channel used to furnish the drug, including retail,
mail order, or specialty pharmacy;
‘‘(VI) with respect to each drug dispensed,
for each type of dispensing channel (including retail, mail order, or specialty pharmacy)—
‘‘(aa) whether such drug is a brand name
drug or a generic drug, and—
‘‘(AA) in the case of a brand name drug,
the wholesale acquisition cost, listed as cost
per days supply and cost per dosage unit, on
the date such drug was dispensed; and
‘‘(BB) in the case of a generic drug, the average wholesale price, listed as cost per days
supply and cost per dosage unit, on the date
such drug was dispensed; and
‘‘(bb) the total number of—
‘‘(AA) prescription claims (including original prescriptions and refills);
‘‘(BB) participants and beneficiaries for
whom a claim for such drug was filed
through the applicable dispensing channel;
‘‘(CC) dosage units and dosage units per fill
of such drug; and
‘‘(DD) days supply of such drug per fill;
‘‘(VII) the net price per course of treatment or single fill, such as a 30-day supply or
90-day supply to the plan or coverage after
rebates, fees, alternative discounts, or other
remuneration received from applicable entities;
‘‘(VIII) the total amount of out-of-pocket
spending by participants and beneficiaries on
such drug, including spending through copayments, coinsurance, and deductibles, but
not including any amounts spent by participants and beneficiaries on drugs not covered
under the plan or coverage, or for which no
claim is submitted under the plan or coverage;
‘‘(IX) the total net spending on the drug;
‘‘(X) the total amount received, or expected to be received, by the plan or issuer
from any applicable entity in rebates, fees,
alternative discounts, or other remuneration;
‘‘(XI) the total amount received, or expected to be received, by the entity providing pharmacy benefit management services, from applicable entities, in rebates,
fees, alternative discounts, or other remuneration from such entities—
‘‘(aa) for claims incurred during the reporting period; and
‘‘(bb) that is related to utilization of such
drug or spending on such drug; and
‘‘(XII) to the extent feasible, information
on the total amount of remuneration for
such drug, including copayment assistance
dollars paid, copayment cards applied, or
other discounts provided by each drug manufacturer (or entity administering copayment
assistance on behalf of such drug manufacturer), to the participants and beneficiaries
enrolled in such plan or coverage;
‘‘(ii) a list of each therapeutic class (as defined by the Secretary) for which a claim
was filed under the group health plan or
health insurance coverage during the reporting period, and, with respect to each such
therapeutic class—
‘‘(I) the total gross spending on drugs in
such class before rebates, price concessions,
alternative discounts, or other remuneration
from applicable entities;
‘‘(II) the net spending in such class after
such rebates, price concessions, alternative

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

discounts, or other remuneration from applicable entities;
‘‘(III) the total amount received, or expected to be received, by the entity providing pharmacy benefit management services, from applicable entities, in rebates,
fees, alternative discounts, or other remuneration from such entities—
‘‘(aa) for claims incurred during the reporting period; and
‘‘(bb) that is related to utilization of drugs
or drug spending;
‘‘(IV) the average net spending per 30-day
supply and per 90-day supply by the plan or
by the issuer with respect to such coverage
and its participants and beneficiaries, among
all drugs within the therapeutic class for
which a claim was filed during the reporting
period;
‘‘(V) the number of participants and beneficiaries who filled a prescription for a drug
in such class, including the National Drug
Code for each such drug;
‘‘(VI) if applicable, a description of the formulary tiers and utilization mechanisms
(such as prior authorization or step therapy)
employed for drugs in that class; and
‘‘(VII) the total out-of-pocket spending
under the plan or coverage by participants
and
beneficiaries,
including
spending
through
copayments,
coinsurance,
and
deductibles, but not including any amounts
spent by participants and beneficiaries on
drugs not covered under the plan or coverage
or for which no claim is submitted under the
plan or coverage;
‘‘(iii) with respect to any drug for which
gross spending under the group health plan
or health insurance coverage exceeded $10,000
during the reporting period or, in the case
that gross spending under the group health
plan or coverage exceeded $10,000 during the
reporting period with respect to fewer than
50 drugs, with respect to the 50 prescription
drugs with the highest spending during the
reporting period—
‘‘(I) a list of all other drugs in the same
therapeutic class as such drug;
‘‘(II) if applicable, the rationale for the formulary placement of such drug in that
therapeutic category or class, selected from
a list of standard rationales established by
the Secretary, in consultation with stakeholders; and
‘‘(III) any change in formulary placement
compared to the prior plan year; and
‘‘(iv) in the case that such plan or issuer
(or an entity providing pharmacy benefit
management services on behalf of such plan
or issuer) has an affiliated pharmacy or
pharmacy under common ownership, including mandatory mail and specialty home delivery programs, retail and mail auto-refill
programs, and cost sharing assistance incentives funded by an entity providing pharmacy benefit services—
‘‘(I) an explanation of any benefit design
parameters that encourage or require participants and beneficiaries in the plan or
coverage to fill prescriptions at mail order,
specialty, or retail pharmacies;
‘‘(II) the percentage of total prescriptions
dispensed by such pharmacies to participants
or beneficiaries in such plan or coverage; and
‘‘(III) a list of all drugs dispensed by such
pharmacies to participants or beneficiaries
enrolled in such plan or coverage, and, with
respect to each drug dispensed—
‘‘(aa) the amount charged, per dosage unit,
per 30-day supply, or per 90-day supply (as
applicable) to the plan or issuer, and to participants and beneficiaries;
‘‘(bb) the median amount charged to such
plan or issuer, and the interquartile range of
the costs, per dosage unit, per 30-day supply,
and per 90-day supply, including amounts
paid by the participants and beneficiaries,
when the same drug is dispensed by other

PO 00000

Frm 00114

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

pharmacies that are not affiliated with or
under common ownership with the entity
and that are included in the pharmacy network of such plan or coverage;
‘‘(cc) the lowest cost per dosage unit, per
30-day supply and per 90-day supply, for each
such drug, including amounts charged to the
plan or coverage and to participants and
beneficiaries, that is available from any
pharmacy included in the network of such
plan or coverage; and
‘‘(dd) the net acquisition cost per dosage
unit, per 30-day supply, and per 90-day supply, if such drug is subject to a maximum
price discount; and
‘‘(B) with respect to any group health plan,
including group health insurance coverage
offered in connection with such a plan, regardless of whether the plan or coverage is
offered by a specified large employer or
whether it is a specified large plan—
‘‘(i) a summary document for the group
health plan that includes such information
described in clauses (i) through (iv) of subparagraph (A), as specified by the Secretary
through guidance, program instruction, or
otherwise (with no requirement of notice and
comment rulemaking), that the Secretary
determines useful to group health plans for
purposes of selecting pharmacy benefit management services, such as an estimated net
price to group health plan and participant or
beneficiary, a cost per claim, the fee structure or reimbursement model, and estimated
cost per participant or beneficiary;
‘‘(ii) a summary document for plans and
issuers to provide to participants and beneficiaries, which shall be made available to
participants or beneficiaries upon request to
their group health plan (including in the
case of group health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan), that—
‘‘(I) contains such information described in
clauses (iii), (iv), (v), and (vi), as applicable,
as specified by the Secretary through guidance, program instruction, or otherwise
(with no requirement of notice and comment
rulemaking) that the Secretary determines
useful to participants or beneficiaries in better understanding the plan or coverage or
benefits under such plan or coverage;
‘‘(II) contains only aggregate information;
and
‘‘(III) states that participants and beneficiaries may request specific, claims-level
information required to be furnished under
subsection (c) from the group health plan or
health insurance issuer; and
‘‘(iii) with respect to drugs covered by such
plan or coverage during such reporting period—
‘‘(I) the total net spending by the plan or
coverage for all such drugs;
‘‘(II) the total amount received, or expected to be received, by the plan or issuer
from any applicable entity in rebates, fees,
alternative discounts, or other remuneration; and
‘‘(III) to the extent feasible, information
on the total amount of remuneration for
such drugs, including copayment assistance
dollars paid, copayment cards applied, or
other discounts provided by each drug manufacturer (or entity administering copayment
assistance on behalf of such drug manufacturer) to participants and beneficiaries;
‘‘(iv) amounts paid directly or indirectly in
rebates, fees, or any other type of compensation
(as
defined
in
section
408(b)(2)(B)(ii)(dd)(AA) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act) to brokerage
firms, brokers, consultants, advisors, or any
other individual or firm, for—
‘‘(I) the referral of the group health plan’s
or health insurance issuer’s business to an
entity providing pharmacy benefit management services, including the identity of the
recipient of such amounts;

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

‘‘(II) consideration of the entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services by
the group health plan or health insurance
issuer; or
‘‘(III) the retention of the entity by the
group health plan or health insurance issuer;
‘‘(v) an explanation of any benefit design
parameters that encourage or require participants and beneficiaries in such plan or
coverage to fill prescriptions at mail order,
specialty, or retail pharmacies that are affiliated with or under common ownership
with the entity providing pharmacy benefit
management services under such plan or coverage, including mandatory mail and specialty home delivery programs, retail and
mail auto-refill programs, and cost-sharing
assistance incentives directly or indirectly
funded by such entity; and
‘‘(vi) total gross spending on all drugs
under the plan or coverage during the reporting period.
‘‘(3) OPT-IN FOR GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE
COVERAGE OFFERED BY A SPECIFIED LARGE EMPLOYER OR THAT IS A SPECIFIED LARGE PLAN.—
In the case of group health insurance coverage offered in connection with a group
health plan that is offered by a specified
large employer or is a specified large plan,
such group health plan may, on an annual
basis, for plan years beginning on or after
the date that is 30 months after the date of
enactment of this section, elect to require an
entity providing pharmacy benefit management services on behalf of the health insurance issuer to submit to such group health
plan a report that includes all of the information described in paragraph (2)(A), in addition to the information described in paragraph (2)(B).
‘‘(4) PRIVACY REQUIREMENTS.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—An entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services on
behalf of a group health plan or a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage shall report information under
paragraph (1) in a manner consistent with
the privacy regulations promulgated under
section 13402(a) of the Health Information
Technology for Economic and Clinical
Health Act and consistent with the privacy
regulations promulgated under the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act of 1996 in part 160 and subparts A and E
of part 164 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or successor regulations) (referred to
in this paragraph as the ‘HIPAA privacy regulations’) and shall restrict the use and disclosure of such information according to
such privacy regulations and such HIPAA
privacy regulations.
‘‘(B) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.—
‘‘(i) IN GENERAL.—An entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services on
behalf of a group health plan or health insurance issuer offering group health insurance
coverage that submits a report under paragraph (1) shall ensure that such report contains only summary health information, as
defined in section 164.504(a) of title 45, Code
of Federal Regulations (or successor regulations).
‘‘(ii) RESTRICTIONS.—In carrying out this
subsection, a group health plan shall comply
with section 164.504(f) of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or a successor regulation),
and a plan sponsor shall act in accordance
with the terms of the agreement described in
such section.
‘‘(C) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—
‘‘(i) Nothing in this section shall be construed to modify the requirements for the
creation, receipt, maintenance, or transmission of protected health information
under the HIPAA privacy regulations.
‘‘(ii) Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the application of any Federal or State privacy or civil rights law, in-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1289

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

cluding the HIPAA privacy regulations, the
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act
of 2008 (Public Law 110–233) (including the
amendments made by such Act), the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C.
12101 et seq.), section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), section 1557 of
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act (42 U.S.C. 18116), title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d), and title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C.
2000e).
‘‘(D) WRITTEN NOTICE.—Each plan year,
group health plans, including with respect to
group health insurance coverage offered in
connection with a group health plan, shall
provide to each participant or beneficiary
written notice informing the participant or
beneficiary of the requirement for entities
providing pharmacy benefit management
services on behalf of the group health plan or
health insurance issuer offering group health
insurance coverage to submit reports to
group health plans under paragraph (1), as
applicable, which may include incorporating
such notification in plan documents provided
to the participant or beneficiary, or providing individual notification.
‘‘(E) LIMITATION TO BUSINESS ASSOCIATES.—
A group health plan receiving a report under
paragraph (1) may disclose such information
only to the entity from which the report was
received or to that entity’s business associates as defined in section 160.103 of title 45,
Code of Federal Regulations (or successor
regulations) or as permitted by the HIPAA
privacy regulations.
‘‘(F) CLARIFICATION REGARDING PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION.—Nothing in this
section shall prevent an entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services on
behalf of a group health plan or health insurance issuer offering group health insurance
coverage, from placing reasonable restrictions on the public disclosure of the information contained in a report described in paragraph (1), except that such plan, issuer, or
entity may not—
‘‘(i) restrict disclosure of such report to
the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Labor, or the Department of the Treasury; or
‘‘(ii) prevent disclosure for the purposes of
subsection (c), or any other public disclosure
requirement under this section.
‘‘(G) LIMITED FORM OF REPORT.—The Secretary shall define through rulemaking a
limited form of the report under paragraph
(1) required with respect to any group health
plan established by a plan sponsor that is, or
is affiliated with, a drug manufacturer, drug
wholesaler, or other direct participant in the
drug supply chain, in order to prevent anticompetitive behavior.
‘‘(5) STANDARD FORMAT AND REGULATIONS.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 18
months after the date of enactment of this
section, the Secretary shall specify through
rulemaking a standard format for entities
providing pharmacy benefit management
services on behalf of group health plans and
health insurance issuers offering group
health insurance coverage, to submit reports
required under paragraph (1).
‘‘(B) ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.—Not later
than 18 months after the date of enactment
of this section, the Secretary shall, through
rulemaking, promulgate any other final regulations necessary to implement the requirements of this section. In promulgating such
regulations, the Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, align the reporting requirements under this section with the reporting
requirements under section 2799A–10.
‘‘(c) REQUIREMENT TO PROVIDE INFORMATION TO PARTICIPANTS OR BENEFICIARIES.—A
group health plan, including with respect to
group health insurance coverage offered in

PO 00000

Frm 00115

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

connection with a group health plan, upon
request of a participant or beneficiary, shall
provide to such participant or beneficiary—
‘‘(1) the summary document described in
subsection (b)(2)(B)(ii); and
‘‘(2) the information described in subsection (b)(2)(A)(i)(III) with respect to a
claim made by or on behalf of such participant or beneficiary.
‘‘(d) ENFORCEMENT.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall enforce this section. The enforcement authority under this subsection shall apply only
with respect to group health plans (including
group health insurance coverage offered in
connection with such a plan) to which the requirements of subparts I and II of part A and
part D apply in accordance with section 2722,
and with respect to entities providing pharmacy benefit management services on behalf
of such plans and applicable entities providing services on behalf of such plans.
‘‘(2) FAILURE TO PROVIDE INFORMATION.—A
group health plan, a health insurance issuer
offering group health insurance coverage, an
entity providing pharmacy benefit management services on behalf of such a plan or
issuer, or an applicable entity providing
services on behalf of such a plan or issuer
that violates subsection (a); an entity providing pharmacy benefit management services on behalf of such a plan or issuer that
fails to provide the information required
under subsection (b); or a group health plan
that fails to provide the information required under subsection (c), shall be subject
to a civil monetary penalty in the amount of
$10,000 for each day during which such violation continues or such information is not
disclosed or reported.
‘‘(3) FALSE INFORMATION.—A health insurance issuer, an entity providing pharmacy
benefit management services, or a third
party administrator providing services on
behalf of such issuer offered by a health insurance issuer that knowingly provides false
information under this section shall be subject to a civil monetary penalty in an
amount not to exceed $100,000 for each item
of false information. Such civil monetary
penalty shall be in addition to other penalties as may be prescribed by law.
‘‘(4) PROCEDURE.—The provisions of section
1128A of the Social Security Act, other than
subsections (a) and (b) and the first sentence
of subsection (c)(1) of such section shall
apply to civil monetary penalties under this
subsection in the same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding
under such section.
‘‘(5) WAIVERS.—The Secretary may waive
penalties under paragraph (2), or extend the
period of time for compliance with a requirement of this section, for an entity in violation of this section that has made a goodfaith effort to comply with the requirements
in this section.
‘‘(e) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in
this section shall be construed to permit a
health insurance issuer, group health plan,
entity providing pharmacy benefit management services on behalf of a group health
plan or health insurance issuer, or other entity to restrict disclosure to, or otherwise
limit the access of, the Secretary to a report
described in subsection (b)(1) or information
related to compliance with subsections (a),
(b), (c), or (d) by such issuer, plan, or entity.
‘‘(f) DEFINITIONS.—In this section:
‘‘(1) APPLICABLE ENTITY.—The term ‘applicable entity’ means—
‘‘(A) an applicable group purchasing organization, drug manufacturer, distributor,
wholesaler, rebate aggregator (or other purchasing entity designed to aggregate rebates), or associated third party;
‘‘(B) any subsidiary, parent, affiliate, or
subcontractor of a group health plan, health

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1290

insurance issuer, entity that provides pharmacy benefit management services on behalf
of such a plan or issuer, or any entity described in subparagraph (A); or
‘‘(C) such other entity as the Secretary
may specify through rulemaking.
‘‘(2) APPLICABLE GROUP PURCHASING ORGANIZATION.—The term ‘applicable group purchasing organization’ means a group purchasing organization that is affiliated with
or under common ownership with an entity
providing pharmacy benefit management
services.
‘‘(3) CONTRACTED COMPENSATION.—The term
‘contracted compensation’ means the sum of
any ingredient cost and dispensing fee for a
drug (inclusive of the out-of-pocket costs to
the participant or beneficiary), or another
analogous compensation structure that the
Secretary may specify through regulations.
‘‘(4) GROSS SPENDING.—The term ‘gross
spending’, with respect to prescription drug
benefits under a group health plan or health
insurance coverage, means the amount spent
by a group health plan or health insurance
issuer on prescription drug benefits, calculated before the application of rebates,
fees, alternative discounts, or other remuneration.
‘‘(5) NET SPENDING.—The term ‘net spending’, with respect to prescription drug benefits under a group health plan or health insurance coverage, means the amount spent
by a group health plan or health insurance
issuer on prescription drug benefits, calculated after the application of rebates, fees,
alternative discounts, or other remuneration.
‘‘(6) PLAN SPONSOR.—The term ‘plan sponsor’ has the meaning given such term in section 3(16)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
‘‘(7) REMUNERATION.—The term ‘remuneration’ has the meaning given such term by
the Secretary through rulemaking, which
shall be reevaluated by the Secretary every
5 years.
‘‘(8) SPECIFIED LARGE EMPLOYER.—The term
‘specified large employer’ means, in connection with a group health plan (including
group health insurance coverage offered in
connection with such a plan) established or
maintained by a single employer, with respect to a calendar year or a plan year, as
applicable, an employer who employed an average of at least 100 employees on business
days during the preceding calendar year or
plan year and who employs at least 1 employee on the first day of the calendar year
or plan year.
‘‘(9) SPECIFIED LARGE PLAN.—The term
‘specified large plan’ means a group health
plan (including group health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan)
established or maintained by a plan sponsor
described in clause (ii) or (iii) of section
3(16)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act of 1974 that had an average of
at least 100 participants on business days
during the preceding calendar year or plan
year, as applicable.
‘‘(10) WHOLESALE ACQUISITION COST.—The
term ‘wholesale acquisition cost’ has the
meaning given such term in section
1847A(c)(6)(B) of the Social Security Act.’’;
and
(2) in section 2723 (42 U.S.C. 300gg–22)—
(A) in subsection (a)—
(i) in paragraph (1), by inserting ‘‘(other
than section 2799A–11)’’ after ‘‘part D’’; and
(ii) in paragraph (2), by inserting ‘‘(other
than section 2799A–11)’’ after ‘‘part D’’; and
(B) in subsection (b)—
(i) in paragraph (1), by inserting ‘‘(other
than section 2799A–11)’’ after ‘‘part D’’;
(ii) in paragraph (2)(A), by inserting
‘‘(other than section 2799A–11)’’ after ‘‘part
D’’; and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

(iii) in paragraph (2)(C)(ii), by inserting
‘‘(other than section 2799A–11)’’ after ‘‘part
D’’.
(b) EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 1974.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Subtitle B of title I of the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act
of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1021 et seq.) is amended—
(A) in subpart B of part 7 (29 U.S.C. 1185 et
seq.), by adding at the end the following:
‘‘SEC. 726. OVERSIGHT OF ENTITIES THAT PROVIDE PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGEMENT SERVICES.

‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—For plan years beginning on or after the date that is 30 months
after the date of enactment of this section
(referred to in this subsection and subsection
(b) as the ‘effective date’), a group health
plan or a health insurance issuer offering
group health insurance coverage, or an entity providing pharmacy benefit management
services on behalf of such a plan or issuer,
shall not enter into a contract, including an
extension or renewal of a contract, entered
into on or after the effective date, with an
applicable entity unless such applicable entity agrees to—
‘‘(1) not limit or delay the disclosure of information to the group health plan (including such a plan offered through a health insurance issuer) in such a manner that prevents an entity providing pharmacy benefit
management services on behalf of a group
health plan or health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage from
making the reports described in subsection
(b); and
‘‘(2) provide the entity providing pharmacy
benefit management services on behalf of a
group health plan or health insurance issuer
relevant information necessary to make the
reports described in subsection (b).
‘‘(b) REPORTS.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—For plan years beginning
on or after the effective date, in the case of
any contract between a group health plan or
a health insurance issuer offering group
health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan and an entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services on
behalf of such plan or issuer, including an extension or renewal of such a contract, entered into on or after the effective date, the
entity providing pharmacy benefit management services on behalf of such a group
health plan or health insurance issuer, not
less frequently than every 6 months (or, at
the request of a group health plan, not less
frequently than quarterly, and under the
same conditions, terms, and cost of the semiannual report under this subsection), shall
submit to the group health plan a report in
accordance with this section. Each such report shall be made available to such group
health plan in plain language, in a machinereadable format, and as the Secretary may
determine, other formats. Each such report
shall include the information described in
paragraph (2).
‘‘(2) INFORMATION DESCRIBED.—For purposes
of paragraph (1), the information described
in this paragraph is, with respect to drugs
covered by a group health plan or group
health insurance coverage offered by a
health insurance issuer in connection with a
group health plan during each reporting period—
‘‘(A) in the case of a group health plan that
is offered by a specified large employer or
that is a specified large plan, and is not offered as health insurance coverage, or in the
case of health insurance coverage for which
the election under paragraph (3) is made for
the applicable reporting period—
‘‘(i) a list of drugs for which a claim was
filed and, with respect to each such drug on
such list—

PO 00000

Frm 00116

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

‘‘(I) the contracted compensation paid by
the group health plan or health insurance
issuer for each covered drug (identified by
the National Drug Code) to the entity providing pharmacy benefit management services or other applicable entity on behalf of
the group health plan or health insurance
issuer;
‘‘(II) the contracted compensation paid to
the pharmacy, by any entity providing pharmacy benefit management services or other
applicable entity on behalf of the group
health plan or health insurance issuer, for
each covered drug (identified by the National
Drug Code);
‘‘(III) for each such claim, the difference
between the amount paid under subclause (I)
and the amount paid under subclause (II);
‘‘(IV) the proprietary name, established
name or proper name, and the National Drug
Code;
‘‘(V) for each claim for the drug (including
original prescriptions and refills) and for
each dosage unit of the drug for which a
claim was filed, the type of dispensing channel used to furnish the drug, including retail,
mail order, or specialty pharmacy;
‘‘(VI) with respect to each drug dispensed,
for each type of dispensing channel (including retail, mail order, or specialty pharmacy)—
‘‘(aa) whether such drug is a brand name
drug or a generic drug, and—
‘‘(AA) in the case of a brand name drug,
the wholesale acquisition cost, listed as cost
per days supply and cost per dosage unit, on
the date such drug was dispensed; and
‘‘(BB) in the case of a generic drug, the average wholesale price, listed as cost per days
supply and cost per dosage unit, on the date
such drug was dispensed; and
‘‘(bb) the total number of—
‘‘(AA) prescription claims (including original prescriptions and refills);
‘‘(BB) participants and beneficiaries for
whom a claim for such drug was filed
through the applicable dispensing channel;
‘‘(CC) dosage units and dosage units per fill
of such drug; and
‘‘(DD) days supply of such drug per fill;
‘‘(VII) the net price per course of treatment or single fill, such as a 30-day supply or
90-day supply to the plan or coverage after
rebates, fees, alternative discounts, or other
remuneration received from applicable entities;
‘‘(VIII) the total amount of out-of-pocket
spending by participants and beneficiaries on
such drug, including spending through copayments, coinsurance, and deductibles, but
not including any amounts spent by participants and beneficiaries on drugs not covered
under the plan or coverage, or for which no
claim is submitted under the plan or coverage;
‘‘(IX) the total net spending on the drug;
‘‘(X) the total amount received, or expected to be received, by the plan or issuer
from any applicable entity in rebates, fees,
alternative discounts, or other remuneration;
‘‘(XI) the total amount received, or expected to be received, by the entity providing pharmacy benefit management services, from applicable entities, in rebates,
fees, alternative discounts, or other remuneration from such entities—
‘‘(aa) for claims incurred during the reporting period; and
‘‘(bb) that is related to utilization of such
drug or spending on such drug; and
‘‘(XII) to the extent feasible, information
on the total amount of remuneration for
such drug, including copayment assistance
dollars paid, copayment cards applied, or
other discounts provided by each drug manufacturer (or entity administering copayment

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

assistance on behalf of such drug manufacturer), to the participants and beneficiaries
enrolled in such plan or coverage;
‘‘(ii) a list of each therapeutic class (as defined by the Secretary) for which a claim
was filed under the group health plan or
health insurance coverage during the reporting period, and, with respect to each such
therapeutic class—
‘‘(I) the total gross spending on drugs in
such class before rebates, price concessions,
alternative discounts, or other remuneration
from applicable entities;
‘‘(II) the net spending in such class after
such rebates, price concessions, alternative
discounts, or other remuneration from applicable entities;
‘‘(III) the total amount received, or expected to be received, by the entity providing pharmacy benefit management services, from applicable entities, in rebates,
fees, alternative discounts, or other remuneration from such entities—
‘‘(aa) for claims incurred during the reporting period; and
‘‘(bb) that is related to utilization of drugs
or drug spending;
‘‘(IV) the average net spending per 30-day
supply and per 90-day supply by the plan or
by the issuer with respect to such coverage
and its participants and beneficiaries, among
all drugs within the therapeutic class for
which a claim was filed during the reporting
period;
‘‘(V) the number of participants and beneficiaries who filled a prescription for a drug
in such class, including the National Drug
Code for each such drug;
‘‘(VI) if applicable, a description of the formulary tiers and utilization mechanisms
(such as prior authorization or step therapy)
employed for drugs in that class; and
‘‘(VII) the total out-of-pocket spending
under the plan or coverage by participants
and
beneficiaries,
including
spending
through
copayments,
coinsurance,
and
deductibles, but not including any amounts
spent by participants and beneficiaries on
drugs not covered under the plan or coverage
or for which no claim is submitted under the
plan or coverage;
‘‘(iii) with respect to any drug for which
gross spending under the group health plan
or health insurance coverage exceeded $10,000
during the reporting period or, in the case
that gross spending under the group health
plan or coverage exceeded $10,000 during the
reporting period with respect to fewer than
50 drugs, with respect to the 50 prescription
drugs with the highest spending during the
reporting period—
‘‘(I) a list of all other drugs in the same
therapeutic class as such drug;
‘‘(II) if applicable, the rationale for the formulary placement of such drug in that
therapeutic category or class, selected from
a list of standard rationales established by
the Secretary, in consultation with stakeholders; and
‘‘(III) any change in formulary placement
compared to the prior plan year; and
‘‘(iv) in the case that such plan or issuer
(or an entity providing pharmacy benefit
management services on behalf of such plan
or issuer) has an affiliated pharmacy or
pharmacy under common ownership, including mandatory mail and specialty home delivery programs, retail and mail auto-refill
programs, and cost sharing assistance incentives funded by an entity providing pharmacy benefit services—
‘‘(I) an explanation of any benefit design
parameters that encourage or require participants and beneficiaries in the plan or
coverage to fill prescriptions at mail order,
specialty, or retail pharmacies;

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1291

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

‘‘(II) the percentage of total prescriptions
dispensed by such pharmacies to participants
or beneficiaries in such plan or coverage; and
‘‘(III) a list of all drugs dispensed by such
pharmacies to participants or beneficiaries
enrolled in such plan or coverage, and, with
respect to each drug dispensed—
‘‘(aa) the amount charged, per dosage unit,
per 30-day supply, or per 90-day supply (as
applicable) to the plan or issuer, and to participants and beneficiaries;
‘‘(bb) the median amount charged to such
plan or issuer, and the interquartile range of
the costs, per dosage unit, per 30-day supply,
and per 90-day supply, including amounts
paid by the participants and beneficiaries,
when the same drug is dispensed by other
pharmacies that are not affiliated with or
under common ownership with the entity
and that are included in the pharmacy network of such plan or coverage;
‘‘(cc) the lowest cost per dosage unit, per
30-day supply and per 90-day supply, for each
such drug, including amounts charged to the
plan or coverage and to participants and
beneficiaries, that is available from any
pharmacy included in the network of such
plan or coverage; and
‘‘(dd) the net acquisition cost per dosage
unit, per 30-day supply, and per 90-day supply, if such drug is subject to a maximum
price discount; and
‘‘(B) with respect to any group health plan,
including group health insurance coverage
offered in connection with such a plan, regardless of whether the plan or coverage is
offered by a specified large employer or
whether it is a specified large plan—
‘‘(i) a summary document for the group
health plan that includes such information
described in clauses (i) through (iv) of subparagraph (A), as specified by the Secretary
through guidance, program instruction, or
otherwise (with no requirement of notice and
comment rulemaking), that the Secretary
determines useful to group health plans for
purposes of selecting pharmacy benefit management services, such as an estimated net
price to group health plan and participant or
beneficiary, a cost per claim, the fee structure or reimbursement model, and estimated
cost per participant or beneficiary;
‘‘(ii) a summary document for plans and
issuers to provide to participants and beneficiaries, which shall be made available to
participants or beneficiaries upon request to
their group health plan (including in the
case of group health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan), that—
‘‘(I) contains such information described in
clauses (iii), (iv), (v), and (vi), as applicable,
as specified by the Secretary through guidance, program instruction, or otherwise
(with no requirement of notice and comment
rulemaking) that the Secretary determines
useful to participants or beneficiaries in better understanding the plan or coverage or
benefits under such plan or coverage;
‘‘(II) contains only aggregate information;
and
‘‘(III) states that participants and beneficiaries may request specific, claims-level
information required to be furnished under
subsection (c) from the group health plan or
health insurance issuer; and
‘‘(iii) with respect to drugs covered by such
plan or coverage during such reporting period—
‘‘(I) the total net spending by the plan or
coverage for all such drugs;
‘‘(II) the total amount received, or expected to be received, by the plan or issuer
from any applicable entity in rebates, fees,
alternative discounts, or other remuneration; and
‘‘(III) to the extent feasible, information
on the total amount of remuneration for
such drugs, including copayment assistance

PO 00000

Frm 00117

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

dollars paid, copayment cards applied, or
other discounts provided by each drug manufacturer (or entity administering copayment
assistance on behalf of such drug manufacturer) to participants and beneficiaries;
‘‘(iv) amounts paid directly or indirectly in
rebates, fees, or any other type of compensation
(as
defined
in
section
408(b)(2)(B)(ii)(dd)(AA)) to brokerage firms,
brokers, consultants, advisors, or any other
individual or firm, for—
‘‘(I) the referral of the group health plan’s
or health insurance issuer’s business to an
entity providing pharmacy benefit management services, including the identity of the
recipient of such amounts;
‘‘(II) consideration of the entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services by
the group health plan or health insurance
issuer; or
‘‘(III) the retention of the entity by the
group health plan or health insurance issuer;
‘‘(v) an explanation of any benefit design
parameters that encourage or require participants and beneficiaries in such plan or
coverage to fill prescriptions at mail order,
specialty, or retail pharmacies that are affiliated with or under common ownership
with the entity providing pharmacy benefit
management services under such plan or coverage, including mandatory mail and specialty home delivery programs, retail and
mail auto-refill programs, and cost-sharing
assistance incentives directly or indirectly
funded by such entity; and
‘‘(vi) total gross spending on all drugs
under the plan or coverage during the reporting period.
‘‘(3) OPT-IN FOR GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE
COVERAGE OFFERED BY A SPECIFIED LARGE EMPLOYER OR THAT IS A SPECIFIED LARGE PLAN.—
In the case of group health insurance coverage offered in connection with a group
health plan that is offered by a specified
large employer or is a specified large plan,
such group health plan may, on an annual
basis, for plan years beginning on or after
the date that is 30 months after the date of
enactment of this section, elect to require an
entity providing pharmacy benefit management services on behalf of the health insurance issuer to submit to such group health
plan a report that includes all of the information described in paragraph (2)(A), in addition to the information described in paragraph (2)(B).
‘‘(4) PRIVACY REQUIREMENTS.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—An entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services on
behalf of a group health plan or a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage shall report information under
paragraph (1) in a manner consistent with
the privacy regulations promulgated under
section 13402(a) of the Health Information
Technology for Economic and Clinical
Health Act (42 U.S.C. 17932(a)) and consistent
with the privacy regulations promulgated
under the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996 in part 160 and
subparts A and E of part 164 of title 45, Code
of Federal Regulations (or successor regulations) (referred to in this paragraph as the
‘HIPAA privacy regulations’) and shall restrict the use and disclosure of such information according to such privacy regulations
and such HIPAA privacy regulations.
‘‘(B) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.—
‘‘(i) IN GENERAL.—An entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services on
behalf of a group health plan or health insurance issuer offering group health insurance
coverage that submits a report under paragraph (1) shall ensure that such report contains only summary health information, as
defined in section 164.504(a) of title 45, Code
of Federal Regulations (or successor regulations).

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1292

‘‘(ii) RESTRICTIONS.—In carrying out this
subsection, a group health plan shall comply
with section 164.504(f) of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or a successor regulation),
and a plan sponsor shall act in accordance
with the terms of the agreement described in
such section.
‘‘(C) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—
‘‘(i) Nothing in this section shall be construed to modify the requirements for the
creation, receipt, maintenance, or transmission of protected health information
under the HIPAA privacy regulations.
‘‘(ii) Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the application of any Federal or State privacy or civil rights law, including the HIPAA privacy regulations, the
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act
of 2008 (Public Law 110–233) (including the
amendments made by such Act), the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C.
12101 et seq.), section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), section 1557 of
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act (42 U.S.C. 18116), title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d), and title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C.
2000e).
‘‘(D) WRITTEN NOTICE.—Each plan year,
group health plans, including with respect to
group health insurance coverage offered in
connection with a group health plan, shall
provide to each participant or beneficiary
written notice informing the participant or
beneficiary of the requirement for entities
providing pharmacy benefit management
services on behalf of the group health plan or
health insurance issuer offering group health
insurance coverage to submit reports to
group health plans under paragraph (1), as
applicable, which may include incorporating
such notification in plan documents provided
to the participant or beneficiary, or providing individual notification.
‘‘(E) LIMITATION TO BUSINESS ASSOCIATES.—
A group health plan receiving a report under
paragraph (1) may disclose such information
only to the entity from which the report was
received or to that entity’s business associates as defined in section 160.103 of title 45,
Code of Federal Regulations (or successor
regulations) or as permitted by the HIPAA
privacy regulations.
‘‘(F) CLARIFICATION REGARDING PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION.—Nothing in this
section shall prevent an entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services on
behalf of a group health plan or health insurance issuer offering group health insurance
coverage, from placing reasonable restrictions on the public disclosure of the information contained in a report described in paragraph (1), except that such plan, issuer, or
entity may not—
‘‘(i) restrict disclosure of such report to
the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Labor, or the Department of the Treasury; or
‘‘(ii) prevent disclosure for the purposes of
subsection (c), or any other public disclosure
requirement under this section.
‘‘(G) LIMITED FORM OF REPORT.—The Secretary shall define through rulemaking a
limited form of the report under paragraph
(1) required with respect to any group health
plan established by a plan sponsor that is, or
is affiliated with, a drug manufacturer, drug
wholesaler, or other direct participant in the
drug supply chain, in order to prevent anticompetitive behavior.
‘‘(5) STANDARD FORMAT AND REGULATIONS.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 18
months after the date of enactment of this
section, the Secretary shall specify through
rulemaking a standard format for entities
providing pharmacy benefit management
services on behalf of group health plans and
health insurance issuers offering group

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

health insurance coverage, to submit reports
required under paragraph (1).
‘‘(B) ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.—Not later
than 18 months after the date of enactment
of this section, the Secretary shall, through
rulemaking, promulgate any other final regulations necessary to implement the requirements of this section. In promulgating such
regulations, the Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, align the reporting requirements under this section with the reporting
requirements under section 725.
‘‘(c) REQUIREMENT TO PROVIDE INFORMATION TO PARTICIPANTS OR BENEFICIARIES.—A
group health plan, including with respect to
group health insurance coverage offered in
connection with a group health plan, upon
request of a participant or beneficiary, shall
provide to such participant or beneficiary—
‘‘(1) the summary document described in
subsection (b)(2)(B)(ii); and
‘‘(2) the information described in subsection (b)(2)(A)(i)(III) with respect to a
claim made by or on behalf of such participant or beneficiary.
‘‘(d) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in
this section shall be construed to permit a
health insurance issuer, group health plan,
entity providing pharmacy benefit management services on behalf of a group health
plan or health insurance issuer, or other entity to restrict disclosure to, or otherwise
limit the access of, the Secretary to a report
described in subsection (b)(1) or information
related to compliance with subsections (a),
(b), or (c) of this section or section 502(c)(13)
by such issuer, plan, or entity.
‘‘(e) DEFINITIONS.—In this section:
‘‘(1) APPLICABLE ENTITY.—The term ‘applicable entity’ means—
‘‘(A) an applicable group purchasing organization, drug manufacturer, distributor,
wholesaler, rebate aggregator (or other purchasing entity designed to aggregate rebates), or associated third party;
‘‘(B) any subsidiary, parent, affiliate, or
subcontractor of a group health plan, health
insurance issuer, entity that provides pharmacy benefit management services on behalf
of such a plan or issuer, or any entity described in subparagraph (A); or
‘‘(C) such other entity as the Secretary
may specify through rulemaking.
‘‘(2) APPLICABLE GROUP PURCHASING ORGANIZATION.—The term ‘applicable group purchasing organization’ means a group purchasing organization that is affiliated with
or under common ownership with an entity
providing pharmacy benefit management
services.
‘‘(3) CONTRACTED COMPENSATION.—The term
‘contracted compensation’ means the sum of
any ingredient cost and dispensing fee for a
drug (inclusive of the out-of-pocket costs to
the participant or beneficiary), or another
analogous compensation structure that the
Secretary may specify through regulations.
‘‘(4) GROSS SPENDING.—The term ‘gross
spending’, with respect to prescription drug
benefits under a group health plan or health
insurance coverage, means the amount spent
by a group health plan or health insurance
issuer on prescription drug benefits, calculated before the application of rebates,
fees, alternative discounts, or other remuneration.
‘‘(5) NET SPENDING.—The term ‘net spending’, with respect to prescription drug benefits under a group health plan or health insurance coverage, means the amount spent
by a group health plan or health insurance
issuer on prescription drug benefits, calculated after the application of rebates, fees,
alternative discounts, or other remuneration.
‘‘(6) PLAN SPONSOR.—The term ‘plan sponsor’ has the meaning given such term in section 3(16)(B).

PO 00000

Frm 00118

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

‘‘(7) REMUNERATION.—The term ‘remuneration’ has the meaning given such term by
the Secretary through rulemaking, which
shall be reevaluated by the Secretary every
5 years.
‘‘(8) SPECIFIED LARGE EMPLOYER.—The term
‘specified large employer’ means, in connection with a group health plan (including
group health insurance coverage offered in
connection with such a plan) established or
maintained by a single employer, with respect to a calendar year or a plan year, as
applicable, an employer who employed an average of at least 100 employees on business
days during the preceding calendar year or
plan year and who employs at least 1 employee on the first day of the calendar year
or plan year.
‘‘(9) SPECIFIED LARGE PLAN.—The term
‘specified large plan’ means a group health
plan (including group health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan)
established or maintained by a plan sponsor
described in clause (ii) or (iii) of section
3(16)(B) that had an average of at least 100
participants on business days during the preceding calendar year or plan year, as applicable.
‘‘(10) WHOLESALE ACQUISITION COST.—The
term ‘wholesale acquisition cost’ has the
meaning given such term in section
1847A(c)(6)(B) of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1395w–3a(c)(6)(B)).’’;
(B) in section 502 (29 U.S.C. 1132)—
(i) in subsection (a)(6), by striking ‘‘or (9)’’
and inserting ‘‘(9), or (13)’’;
(ii) in subsection (b)(3), by striking ‘‘under
subsection (c)(9)’’ and inserting ‘‘under paragraphs (9) and (13) of subsection (c)’’; and
(iii) in subsection (c), by adding at the end
the following:
‘‘(13) SECRETARIAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
RELATING TO OVERSIGHT OF PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGEMENT SERVICES.—
‘‘(A) FAILURE TO PROVIDE INFORMATION.—
The Secretary may impose a penalty against
a plan administrator of a group health plan,
a health insurance issuer offering group
health insurance coverage, or an entity providing pharmacy benefit management services on behalf of such a plan or issuer, or an
applicable entity (as defined in section
726(e)) that violates section 726(a); an entity
providing pharmacy benefit management
services on behalf of such a plan or issuer
that fails to provide the information required under section 726(b); or any person
who causes a group health plan to fail to provide the information required under section
726(c), in the amount of $10,000 for each day
during which such violation continues or
such information is not disclosed or reported.
‘‘(B) FALSE INFORMATION.—The Secretary
may impose a penalty against a plan administrator of a group health plan, a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage, an entity providing pharmacy
benefit management services, or an applicable entity (as defined in section 726(e)) that
knowingly provides false information under
section 726, in an amount not to exceed
$100,000 for each item of false information.
Such penalty shall be in addition to other
penalties as may be prescribed by law.
‘‘(C) WAIVERS.—The Secretary may waive
penalties under subparagraph (A), or extend
the period of time for compliance with a requirement of this section, for an entity in
violation of section 726 that has made a
good-faith effort to comply with the requirements of section 726.’’; and
(C) in section 732(a) (29 U.S.C. 1191a(a)), by
striking ‘‘section 711’’ and inserting ‘‘sections 711 and 726’’.
(2) CLERICAL AMENDMENT.—The table of
contents in section 1 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

1001 et seq.) is amended by inserting after
the item relating to section 725 the following
new item:
‘‘Sec. 726. Oversight of entities that provide
pharmacy benefit management
services.’’.
(c) INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Chapter 100 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended—
(A) by adding at the end of subchapter B
the following:

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

‘‘SEC. 9826. OVERSIGHT OF ENTITIES THAT PROVIDE PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGEMENT SERVICES.
‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—For plan years begin-

ning on or after the date that is 30 months
after the date of enactment of this section
(referred to in this subsection and subsection
(b) as the ‘effective date’), a group health
plan, or an entity providing pharmacy benefit management services on behalf of such a
plan, shall not enter into a contract, including an extension or renewal of a contract,
entered into on or after the effective date,
with an applicable entity unless such applicable entity agrees to—
‘‘(1) not limit or delay the disclosure of information to the group health plan in such a
manner that prevents an entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services on
behalf of a group health plan from making
the reports described in subsection (b); and
‘‘(2) provide the entity providing pharmacy
benefit management services on behalf of a
group health plan relevant information necessary to make the reports described in subsection (b).
‘‘(b) REPORTS.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—For plan years beginning
on or after the effective date, in the case of
any contract between a group health plan
and an entity providing pharmacy benefit
management services on behalf of such plan,
including an extension or renewal of such a
contract, entered into on or after the effective date, the entity providing pharmacy
benefit management services on behalf of
such a group health plan, not less frequently
than every 6 months (or, at the request of a
group health plan, not less frequently than
quarterly, and under the same conditions,
terms, and cost of the semiannual report
under this subsection), shall submit to the
group health plan a report in accordance
with this section. Each such report shall be
made available to such group health plan in
plain language, in a machine-readable format, and as the Secretary may determine,
other formats. Each such report shall include the information described in paragraph
(2).
‘‘(2) INFORMATION DESCRIBED.—For purposes
of paragraph (1), the information described
in this paragraph is, with respect to drugs
covered by a group health plan during each
reporting period—
‘‘(A) in the case of a group health plan that
is offered by a specified large employer or
that is a specified large plan, and is not offered as health insurance coverage, or in the
case of health insurance coverage for which
the election under paragraph (3) is made for
the applicable reporting period—
‘‘(i) a list of drugs for which a claim was
filed and, with respect to each such drug on
such list—
‘‘(I) the contracted compensation paid by
the group health plan for each covered drug
(identified by the National Drug Code) to the
entity providing pharmacy benefit management services or other applicable entity on
behalf of the group health plan;
‘‘(II) the contracted compensation paid to
the pharmacy, by any entity providing pharmacy benefit management services or other
applicable entity on behalf of the group
health plan, for each covered drug (identified
by the National Drug Code);

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1293

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

‘‘(III) for each such claim, the difference
between the amount paid under subclause (I)
and the amount paid under subclause (II);
‘‘(IV) the proprietary name, established
name or proper name, and the National Drug
Code;
‘‘(V) for each claim for the drug (including
original prescriptions and refills) and for
each dosage unit of the drug for which a
claim was filed, the type of dispensing channel used to furnish the drug, including retail,
mail order, or specialty pharmacy;
‘‘(VI) with respect to each drug dispensed,
for each type of dispensing channel (including retail, mail order, or specialty pharmacy)—
‘‘(aa) whether such drug is a brand name
drug or a generic drug, and—
‘‘(AA) in the case of a brand name drug,
the wholesale acquisition cost, listed as cost
per days supply and cost per dosage unit, on
the date such drug was dispensed; and
‘‘(BB) in the case of a generic drug, the average wholesale price, listed as cost per days
supply and cost per dosage unit, on the date
such drug was dispensed; and
‘‘(bb) the total number of—
‘‘(AA) prescription claims (including original prescriptions and refills);
‘‘(BB) participants and beneficiaries for
whom a claim for such drug was filed
through the applicable dispensing channel;
‘‘(CC) dosage units and dosage units per fill
of such drug; and
‘‘(DD) days supply of such drug per fill;
‘‘(VII) the net price per course of treatment or single fill, such as a 30-day supply or
90-day supply to the plan after rebates, fees,
alternative discounts, or other remuneration
received from applicable entities;
‘‘(VIII) the total amount of out-of-pocket
spending by participants and beneficiaries on
such drug, including spending through copayments, coinsurance, and deductibles, but
not including any amounts spent by participants and beneficiaries on drugs not covered
under the plan, or for which no claim is submitted under the plan;
‘‘(IX) the total net spending on the drug;
‘‘(X) the total amount received, or expected to be received, by the plan from any
applicable entity in rebates, fees, alternative
discounts, or other remuneration;
‘‘(XI) the total amount received, or expected to be received, by the entity providing pharmacy benefit management services, from applicable entities, in rebates,
fees, alternative discounts, or other remuneration from such entities—
‘‘(aa) for claims incurred during the reporting period; and
‘‘(bb) that is related to utilization of such
drug or spending on such drug; and
‘‘(XII) to the extent feasible, information
on the total amount of remuneration for
such drug, including copayment assistance
dollars paid, copayment cards applied, or
other discounts provided by each drug manufacturer (or entity administering copayment
assistance on behalf of such drug manufacturer), to the participants and beneficiaries
enrolled in such plan;
‘‘(ii) a list of each therapeutic class (as defined by the Secretary) for which a claim
was filed under the group health plan during
the reporting period, and, with respect to
each such therapeutic class—
‘‘(I) the total gross spending on drugs in
such class before rebates, price concessions,
alternative discounts, or other remuneration
from applicable entities;
‘‘(II) the net spending in such class after
such rebates, price concessions, alternative
discounts, or other remuneration from applicable entities;
‘‘(III) the total amount received, or expected to be received, by the entity providing pharmacy benefit management serv-

PO 00000

Frm 00119

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ices, from applicable entities, in rebates,
fees, alternative discounts, or other remuneration from such entities—
‘‘(aa) for claims incurred during the reporting period; and
‘‘(bb) that is related to utilization of drugs
or drug spending;
‘‘(IV) the average net spending per 30-day
supply and per 90-day supply by the plan and
its participants and beneficiaries, among all
drugs within the therapeutic class for which
a claim was filed during the reporting period;
‘‘(V) the number of participants and beneficiaries who filled a prescription for a drug
in such class, including the National Drug
Code for each such drug;
‘‘(VI) if applicable, a description of the formulary tiers and utilization mechanisms
(such as prior authorization or step therapy)
employed for drugs in that class; and
‘‘(VII) the total out-of-pocket spending
under the plan by participants and beneficiaries, including spending through copayments, coinsurance, and deductibles, but not
including any amounts spent by participants
and beneficiaries on drugs not covered under
the plan or for which no claim is submitted
under the plan;
‘‘(iii) with respect to any drug for which
gross spending under the group health plan
exceeded $10,000 during the reporting period
or, in the case that gross spending under the
group health plan exceeded $10,000 during the
reporting period with respect to fewer than
50 drugs, with respect to the 50 prescription
drugs with the highest spending during the
reporting period—
‘‘(I) a list of all other drugs in the same
therapeutic class as such drug;
‘‘(II) if applicable, the rationale for the formulary placement of such drug in that
therapeutic category or class, selected from
a list of standard rationales established by
the Secretary, in consultation with stakeholders; and
‘‘(III) any change in formulary placement
compared to the prior plan year; and
‘‘(iv) in the case that such plan (or an entity providing pharmacy benefit management
services on behalf of such plan) has an affiliated pharmacy or pharmacy under common
ownership, including mandatory mail and
specialty home delivery programs, retail and
mail auto-refill programs, and cost sharing
assistance incentives funded by an entity
providing pharmacy benefit services—
‘‘(I) an explanation of any benefit design
parameters that encourage or require participants and beneficiaries in the plan to fill
prescriptions at mail order, specialty, or retail pharmacies;
‘‘(II) the percentage of total prescriptions
dispensed by such pharmacies to participants
or beneficiaries in such plan; and
‘‘(III) a list of all drugs dispensed by such
pharmacies to participants or beneficiaries
enrolled in such plan, and, with respect to
each drug dispensed—
‘‘(aa) the amount charged, per dosage unit,
per 30-day supply, or per 90-day supply (as
applicable) to the plan, and to participants
and beneficiaries;
‘‘(bb) the median amount charged to such
plan, and the interquartile range of the
costs, per dosage unit, per 30-day supply, and
per 90-day supply, including amounts paid by
the participants and beneficiaries, when the
same drug is dispensed by other pharmacies
that are not affiliated with or under common
ownership with the entity and that are included in the pharmacy network of such
plan;
‘‘(cc) the lowest cost per dosage unit, per
30-day supply and per 90-day supply, for each
such drug, including amounts charged to the
plan and to participants and beneficiaries,
that is available from any pharmacy included in the network of such plan; and

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1294

‘‘(dd) the net acquisition cost per dosage
unit, per 30-day supply, and per 90-day supply, if such drug is subject to a maximum
price discount; and
‘‘(B) with respect to any group health plan,
regardless of whether the plan is offered by a
specified large employer or whether it is a
specified large plan—
‘‘(i) a summary document for the group
health plan that includes such information
described in clauses (i) through (iv) of subparagraph (A), as specified by the Secretary
through guidance, program instruction, or
otherwise (with no requirement of notice and
comment rulemaking), that the Secretary
determines useful to group health plans for
purposes of selecting pharmacy benefit management services, such as an estimated net
price to group health plan and participant or
beneficiary, a cost per claim, the fee structure or reimbursement model, and estimated
cost per participant or beneficiary;
‘‘(ii) a summary document for plans to provide to participants and beneficiaries, which
shall be made available to participants or
beneficiaries upon request to their group
health plan, that—
‘‘(I) contains such information described in
clauses (iii), (iv), (v), and (vi), as applicable,
as specified by the Secretary through guidance, program instruction, or otherwise
(with no requirement of notice and comment
rulemaking) that the Secretary determines
useful to participants or beneficiaries in better understanding the plan or benefits under
such plan;
‘‘(II) contains only aggregate information;
and
‘‘(III) states that participants and beneficiaries may request specific, claims-level
information required to be furnished under
subsection (c) from the group health plan;
and
‘‘(iii) with respect to drugs covered by such
plan during such reporting period—
‘‘(I) the total net spending by the plan for
all such drugs;
‘‘(II) the total amount received, or expected to be received, by the plan from any
applicable entity in rebates, fees, alternative
discounts, or other remuneration; and
‘‘(III) to the extent feasible, information
on the total amount of remuneration for
such drugs, including copayment assistance
dollars paid, copayment cards applied, or
other discounts provided by each drug manufacturer (or entity administering copayment
assistance on behalf of such drug manufacturer) to participants and beneficiaries;
‘‘(iv) amounts paid directly or indirectly in
rebates, fees, or any other type of compensation
(as
defined
in
section
408(b)(2)(B)(ii)(dd)(AA) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (29 U.S.C.
1108(b)(2)(B)(ii)(dd)(AA))) to brokerage firms,
brokers, consultants, advisors, or any other
individual or firm, for—
‘‘(I) the referral of the group health plan’s
business to an entity providing pharmacy
benefit management services, including the
identity of the recipient of such amounts;
‘‘(II) consideration of the entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services by
the group health plan; or
‘‘(III) the retention of the entity by the
group health plan;
‘‘(v) an explanation of any benefit design
parameters that encourage or require participants and beneficiaries in such plan to
fill prescriptions at mail order, specialty, or
retail pharmacies that are affiliated with or
under common ownership with the entity
providing pharmacy benefit management
services under such plan, including mandatory mail and specialty home delivery programs, retail and mail auto-refill programs,
and cost-sharing assistance incentives di-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

rectly or indirectly funded by such entity;
and
‘‘(vi) total gross spending on all drugs
under the plan during the reporting period.
‘‘(3) OPT-IN FOR GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE
COVERAGE OFFERED BY A SPECIFIED LARGE EMPLOYER OR THAT IS A SPECIFIED LARGE PLAN.—
In the case of group health insurance coverage offered in connection with a group
health plan that is offered by a specified
large employer or is a specified large plan,
such group health plan may, on an annual
basis, for plan years beginning on or after
the date that is 30 months after the date of
enactment of this section, elect to require an
entity providing pharmacy benefit management services on behalf of the health insurance issuer to submit to such group health
plan a report that includes all of the information described in paragraph (2)(A), in addition to the information described in paragraph (2)(B).
‘‘(4) PRIVACY REQUIREMENTS.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—An entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services on
behalf of a group health plan shall report information under paragraph (1) in a manner
consistent with the privacy regulations promulgated under section 13402(a) of the Health
Information Technology for Economic and
Clinical Health Act (42 U.S.C. 17932(a)) and
consistent with the privacy regulations promulgated under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 in part
160 and subparts A and E of part 164 of title
45, Code of Federal Regulations (or successor
regulations) (referred to in this paragraph as
the ‘HIPAA privacy regulations’) and shall
restrict the use and disclosure of such information according to such privacy regulations and such HIPAA privacy regulations.
‘‘(B) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.—
‘‘(i) IN GENERAL.—An entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services on
behalf of a group health plan that submits a
report under paragraph (1) shall ensure that
such report contains only summary health
information, as defined in section 164.504(a)
of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or
successor regulations).
‘‘(ii) RESTRICTIONS.—In carrying out this
subsection, a group health plan shall comply
with section 164.504(f) of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or a successor regulation),
and a plan sponsor shall act in accordance
with the terms of the agreement described in
such section.
‘‘(C) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—
‘‘(i) Nothing in this section shall be construed to modify the requirements for the
creation, receipt, maintenance, or transmission of protected health information
under the HIPAA privacy regulations.
‘‘(ii) Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the application of any Federal or State privacy or civil rights law, including the HIPAA privacy regulations, the
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act
of 2008 (Public Law 110–233) (including the
amendments made by such Act), the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C.
12101 et seq.), section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), section 1557 of
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act (42 U.S.C. 18116), title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d), and title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C.
2000e).
‘‘(D) WRITTEN NOTICE.—Each plan year,
group health plans shall provide to each participant or beneficiary written notice informing the participant or beneficiary of the
requirement for entities providing pharmacy
benefit management services on behalf of the
group health plan to submit reports to group
health plans under paragraph (1), as applicable, which may include incorporating such
notification in plan documents provided to

PO 00000

Frm 00120

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

the participant or beneficiary, or providing
individual notification.
‘‘(E) LIMITATION TO BUSINESS ASSOCIATES.—
A group health plan receiving a report under
paragraph (1) may disclose such information
only to the entity from which the report was
received or to that entity’s business associates as defined in section 160.103 of title 45,
Code of Federal Regulations (or successor
regulations) or as permitted by the HIPAA
privacy regulations.
‘‘(F) CLARIFICATION REGARDING PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION.—Nothing in this
section shall prevent an entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services on
behalf of a group health plan, from placing
reasonable restrictions on the public disclosure of the information contained in a report
described in paragraph (1), except that such
plan or entity may not—
‘‘(i) restrict disclosure of such report to
the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Labor, or the Department of the Treasury; or
‘‘(ii) prevent disclosure for the purposes of
subsection (c), or any other public disclosure
requirement under this section.
‘‘(G) LIMITED FORM OF REPORT.—The Secretary shall define through rulemaking a
limited form of the report under paragraph
(1) required with respect to any group health
plan established by a plan sponsor that is, or
is affiliated with, a drug manufacturer, drug
wholesaler, or other direct participant in the
drug supply chain, in order to prevent anticompetitive behavior.
‘‘(5) STANDARD FORMAT AND REGULATIONS.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 18
months after the date of enactment of this
section, the Secretary shall specify through
rulemaking a standard format for entities
providing pharmacy benefit management
services on behalf of group health plans, to
submit reports required under paragraph (1).
‘‘(B) ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.—Not later
than 18 months after the date of enactment
of this section, the Secretary shall, through
rulemaking, promulgate any other final regulations necessary to implement the requirements of this section. In promulgating such
regulations, the Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, align the reporting requirements under this section with the reporting
requirements under section 9825.
‘‘(c) REQUIREMENT TO PROVIDE INFORMATION TO PARTICIPANTS OR BENEFICIARIES.—A
group health plan, upon request of a participant or beneficiary, shall provide to such
participant or beneficiary—
‘‘(1) the summary document described in
subsection (b)(2)(B)(ii); and
‘‘(2) the information described in subsection (b)(2)(A)(i)(III) with respect to a
claim made by or on behalf of such participant or beneficiary.
‘‘(d) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in
this section shall be construed to permit a
health insurance issuer, group health plan,
entity providing pharmacy benefit management services on behalf of a group health
plan or health insurance issuer, or other entity to restrict disclosure to, or otherwise
limit the access of, the Secretary to a report
described in subsection (b)(1) or information
related to compliance with subsections (a),
(b), or (c) of this section or section 4980D(g)
by such issuer, plan, or entity.
‘‘(e) DEFINITIONS.—In this section:
‘‘(1) APPLICABLE ENTITY.—The term ‘applicable entity’ means—
‘‘(A) an applicable group purchasing organization, drug manufacturer, distributor,
wholesaler, rebate aggregator (or other purchasing entity designed to aggregate rebates), or associated third party;
‘‘(B) any subsidiary, parent, affiliate, or
subcontractor of a group health plan, health

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

insurance issuer, entity that provides pharmacy benefit management services on behalf
of such a plan or issuer, or any entity described in subparagraph (A); or
‘‘(C) such other entity as the Secretary
may specify through rulemaking.
‘‘(2) APPLICABLE GROUP PURCHASING ORGANIZATION.—The term ‘applicable group purchasing organization’ means a group purchasing organization that is affiliated with
or under common ownership with an entity
providing pharmacy benefit management
services.
‘‘(3) CONTRACTED COMPENSATION.—The term
‘contracted compensation’ means the sum of
any ingredient cost and dispensing fee for a
drug (inclusive of the out-of-pocket costs to
the participant or beneficiary), or another
analogous compensation structure that the
Secretary may specify through regulations.
‘‘(4) GROSS SPENDING.—The term ‘gross
spending’, with respect to prescription drug
benefits under a group health plan, means
the amount spent by a group health plan on
prescription drug benefits, calculated before
the application of rebates, fees, alternative
discounts, or other remuneration.
‘‘(5) NET SPENDING.—The term ‘net spending’, with respect to prescription drug benefits under a group health plan, means the
amount spent by a group health plan on prescription drug benefits, calculated after the
application of rebates, fees, alternative discounts, or other remuneration.
‘‘(6) PLAN SPONSOR.—The term ‘plan sponsor’ has the meaning given such term in section 3(16)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C.
1002(16)(B)).
‘‘(7) REMUNERATION.—The term ‘remuneration’ has the meaning given such term by
the Secretary, through rulemaking, which
shall be reevaluated by the Secretary every
5 years.
‘‘(8) SPECIFIED LARGE EMPLOYER.—The term
‘specified large employer’ means, in connection with a group health plan established or
maintained by a single employer, with respect to a calendar year or a plan year, as
applicable, an employer who employed an average of at least 100 employees on business
days during the preceding calendar year or
plan year and who employs at least 1 employee on the first day of the calendar year
or plan year.
‘‘(9) SPECIFIED LARGE PLAN.—The term
‘specified large plan’ means a group health
plan established or maintained by a plan
sponsor described in clause (ii) or (iii) of section 3(16)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C.
1002(16)(B)) that had an average of at least
100 participants on business days during the
preceding calendar year or plan year, as applicable.
‘‘(10) WHOLESALE ACQUISITION COST.—The
term ‘wholesale acquisition cost’ has the
meaning given such term in section
1847A(c)(6)(B) of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1395w–3a(c)(6)(B)).’’;
(2) EXCEPTION FOR CERTAIN GROUP HEALTH
PLANS.—Section 9831(a)(2) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting
‘‘other than with respect to section 9826,’’ before ‘‘any group health plan’’.
(3) ENFORCEMENT.—Section 4980D of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by
adding at the end the following new subsection:
‘‘(g) APPLICATION TO REQUIREMENTS IMPOSED ON CERTAIN ENTITIES PROVIDING PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGEMENT SERVICES.—In
the case of any requirement under section
9826 that applies with respect to an entity
providing pharmacy benefit management
services on behalf of a group health plan, any
reference in this section to such group
health plan (and the reference in subsection

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1295

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(e)(1) to the employer) shall be treated as including a reference to such entity.’’.
(4) CLERICAL AMENDMENT.—The table of
sections for subchapter B of chapter 100 of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended
by adding at the end the following new item:
‘‘Sec. 9826. Oversight of entities that provide
pharmacy benefit management
services.’’.
SEC. 6702. FULL REBATE PASS THROUGH TO
PLAN; EXCEPTION FOR INNOCENT
PLAN FIDUCIARIES.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 408(b)(2) of the

Employee Retirement Income Security Act
of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1108(b)(2)) is amended—
(1) in subparagraph (B)(viii)—
(A) by redesignating subclauses (II)
through (IV) as subclauses (III) through (V),
respectively;
(B) in subclause (I)—
(i) by striking ‘‘subclause (II)’’ and inserting ‘‘subclause (III)’’; and
(ii) by striking ‘‘subclauses (II) and (III)’’
and inserting ‘‘subclauses (III) and (IV)’’; and
(C) by inserting after subclause (I) the following:
‘‘(II) Pursuant to subsection (a), subparagraphs (C) and (D) of section 406(a)(1) shall
not apply to a responsible plan fiduciary,
notwithstanding any failure to remit required amounts under subparagraph (C)(i), if
the following conditions are met:
‘‘(aa) The responsible plan fiduciary did
not know that the covered service provider
failed or would fail to make required remittances and reasonably believed that the covered service provider remitted such required
amounts.
‘‘(bb) The responsible plan fiduciary, upon
discovering that the covered service provider
failed to remit the required amounts, requests in writing that the covered service
provider remit such amounts.
‘‘(cc) If the covered service provider fails
to comply with a written request described
in subclause (III) within 90 days of the request, the responsible plan fiduciary notifies
the Secretary of the covered service provider’s failure, in accordance with subclauses
(III) and (IV).’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(C)(i)(I) For plan years beginning on or
after the date that is 30 months after the
date of enactment of this subparagraph (referred to in this clause as the ‘effective
date’), no contract or arrangement or renewal or extension of a contract or arrangement, entered into on or after the effective
date, for services between a covered plan and
a covered service provider (or between a
sponsor of a covered plan and a covered service provider), through a health insurance
issuer offering group health insurance coverage, a third-party administrator, an entity
providing pharmacy benefit management
services, or other entity, for pharmacy benefit management services, is reasonable
within the meaning of this paragraph unless
such entity providing pharmacy benefit management services—
‘‘(aa) remits 100 percent of rebates, fees, alternative discounts, and other remuneration
received from any applicable entity that are
related to utilization of drugs or drug spending under such health plan or health insurance coverage, to the group health plan or,
in the case of a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, to the
health insurance issuer offering group health
insurance coverage on behalf of the plan; and
‘‘(bb) does not enter into any contract for
pharmacy benefit management services on
behalf of such a plan or coverage, with an applicable entity unless 100 percent of rebates,
fees, alternative discounts, and other remuneration received under such contract that

PO 00000

Frm 00121

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

are related to the utilization of drugs or drug
spending under such group health plan or
health insurance coverage are remitted to
the group health plan or, in the case of a
health insurance issuer offering group health
insurance coverage in connection with a
group health plan, to the health insurance
issuer on behalf of the plan by the entity
providing pharmacy benefit management
services.
‘‘(II) Nothing in subclause (I) shall be construed to affect the term of a contract or arrangement, as in effect on the effective date
(as described in such subclause), except that
such subclause shall apply to any renewal or
extension of such a contract or arrangement
entered into on or after such effective date,
as so described.
‘‘(ii) With respect to such rebates, fees, alternative discounts, and other remuneration—
‘‘(I) the rebates, fees, alternative discounts, and other remuneration under clause
(i)(I) shall be—
‘‘(aa) remitted—
‘‘(AA) on a quarterly basis, to the group
health plan or, in the case of a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance
coverage in connection with a group health
plan, to the group health insurance issuer on
behalf of the plan, not later than 90 days
after the end of each quarter; or
‘‘(BB) in the case of an underpayment in a
remittance for a prior quarter, as soon as
practicable, but not later than 90 days after
notice of the underpayment is first given;
‘‘(bb) fully disclosed and enumerated to the
group health plan or health insurance issuer;
and
‘‘(cc) returned to the covered service provider for pharmacy benefit management
services on behalf of the group health plan if
any audit by a plan sponsor, issuer or a third
party designated by a plan sponsor, indicates
that the amounts received are in excess of
correct amounts after such amounts have
been paid to the group health plan, in the
amount of such excess;
‘‘(II) the Secretary may issue regulations
governing—
‘‘(aa) procedures for the remittance of rebates, fees, alternative discounts, and other
remuneration under subclause (I)(aa);
‘‘(bb) any audit pursuant to this subparagraph; and
‘‘(cc) the timing, manner, and content of
the disclosure of rebates, fees, alternative
discounts, and other remuneration under
subclause (I)(bb) as well as any other information the Secretary determines necessary
for the responsible plan fiduciary to consider
the reasonableness of the contract or arrangement (provided that such information
does not include personally identifiable
health information or protected health information subject to established individual privacy and nondiscrimination requirements
under law); and
‘‘(III) the records of such rebates, fees, alternative discounts, other remuneration, and
disclosures, shall be available for audit by
the plan (or the plan sponsor, issuer, or a
third party designated by a plan sponsor on
behalf of the plan), not less than once per
plan year.
‘‘(iii) To ensure that an entity providing
pharmacy benefit management services is
able to meet the requirements of clause
(ii)(I), a rebate aggregator (or other purchasing entity designed to aggregate rebates) and an applicable group purchasing
organization shall remit such rebates to the
entity providing pharmacy benefit management services not later than 45 days after
the end of each quarter.
‘‘(iv) A third-party administrator of a
group health plan, a health insurance issuer
offering group health insurance coverage, or

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1296

a covered service provider for pharmacy benefit management services under such health
plan or health insurance coverage shall
make
rebate
contracts
with
rebate
aggregators or drug manufacturers available
for audit by such plan, subject to reasonable
restrictions (as determined by the Secretary)
on confidentiality to prevent re-disclosure of
such contracts or use of such information in
audits for purposes unrelated to this section.
‘‘(v) Audits carried out under clauses
(ii)(III) and (iv) shall be performed by an
auditor selected by the responsible plan fiduciary. Payment for such auditors shall not
be made, whether directly or indirectly, by
the entity providing pharmacy benefit management services.
‘‘(vi) Nothing in this subparagraph shall be
construed to—
‘‘(I) prohibit reasonable payments to entities offering pharmacy benefit management
services for bona fide services using a fee
structure not described in this subparagraph,
provided that such fees are transparent and
quantifiable to group health plans and
health insurance issuers;
‘‘(II) require a third-party administrator of
a group health plan or covered service provider for pharmacy benefit management
services under such health plan or health insurance coverage to remit bona fide service
fees to the group health plan;
‘‘(III) limit the ability of a group health
plan or health insurance issuer to pass
through rebates, fees, alternative discounts,
and other remuneration to the participant or
beneficiary;
‘‘(IV) modify the requirements for the creation, receipt, maintenance, or transmission
of protected health information under the
privacy regulations promulgated under the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 in part 160 and subparts A
and E of part 164 of title 45, Code of Federal
Regulations (or successor regulations); or
‘‘(V) limit any requirement under subparagraph (A) or (B).
‘‘(vii) For purposes of this subparagraph—
‘‘(I) the terms ‘applicable entity’ and ‘applicable group purchasing organization’ have
the meanings given such terms in section
726(e);
‘‘(II) the terms ‘covered plan’, ‘covered
service provider’, and ‘responsible plan fiduciary’ have the meanings given such terms in
subparagraph (B); and
‘‘(III) the terms ‘group health insurance
coverage’, ‘health insurance coverage’, and
‘health insurance issuer’ have the meanings
given such terms in section 733.’’.
(b) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Subclause
(II)(aa) of section 408(b)(2)(B)(viii) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 (29 U.S.C. 1108(b)(2)(B)(viii)), as amended
by subsection (a), shall not be construed to
relieve or limit a responsible plan fiduciary
from the duty to monitor the practices of
any covered service provider that contracts
with the applicable covered plan, including
for the purposes of ensuring the reasonableness of compensation. For purposes of this
subsection, the terms ‘‘covered plan’’, ‘‘covered service provider’’, and ‘‘responsible plan
fiduciary’’ have the meanings given such
terms in section 408(b)(2)(B)(ii) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 (29 U.S.C. 1108(b)(2)(B)(ii)).
(c) CLARIFICATION OF COVERED SERVICE
PROVIDER.—
(1) SERVICES.—Section 408(b)(2)(B)(ii)(I)(bb)
of the Employee Retirement Income Security
Act
of
1974
(29
U.S.C.
1108(b)(2)(B)(ii)(I)(bb)) is amended—
(A) in subitem (AA) by striking ‘‘Brokerage services,’’ and inserting ‘‘Services (including brokerage services),’’; and
(B) in subitem (BB)—
(i) by striking ‘‘Consulting,’’ and inserting
‘‘Other services,’’; and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

(ii) by striking ‘‘related to the development or implementation of plan design’’ and
all that follows through the period at the
end and inserting ‘‘including any of the following: plan design, insurance or insurance
product selection (including vision and dental), recordkeeping, medical management,
benefits administration selection (including
vision and dental), stop-loss insurance, pharmacy benefit management services, wellness
design and management services, transparency tools, group purchasing organization
agreements and services, participation in
and services from preferred vendor panels,
disease management, compliance services,
employee assistance programs, or thirdparty administration services, or consulting
services related to any such services.’’.
(2) CERTAIN ARRANGEMENTS FOR PHARMACY
BENEFIT MANAGEMENT SERVICES CONSIDERED
AS INDIRECT.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Section 408(b)(2)(B)(i) of

the Employee Retirement Income Security
Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1108(b)(2)(B)(i)) is
amended—
(i) by striking ‘‘requirements of this
clause’’ and inserting ‘‘requirements of this
subparagraph’’; and
(ii) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘For purposes of applying section 406(a)(1)(C)
with respect to a transaction described under
this subparagraph or subparagraph (C), a
contract or arrangement for services between a covered plan and an entity providing
services to the plan, including a health insurance issuer providing health insurance
coverage in connection with the covered
plan, in which such entity contracts, in connection with such plan, with a service provider for pharmacy benefit management
services, shall be considered an indirect furnishing of goods, services, or facilities between the covered plan and the service provider for pharmacy benefit management
services acting as the party in interest.’’.
(B) EXEMPTION.—Section 408(b)(2)(B) (29
U.S.C. 1108(b)(2)(B)) of such Act is amended
by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(x) A service provider for pharmacy benefit management services that is considered
to indirectly furnish goods, services, or facilities to a covered plan, as described in
clause (i)(I), is entitled to relief with respect
to a violation of this section provided the
conditions for receiving such relief are satisfied.’’.
(C) HEALTH INSURANCE ISSUER AND HEALTH
INSURANCE
COVERAGE
DEFINED.—Section
408(b)(2)(B)(ii)(I)(aa) of such Act (29 U.S.C.
1108(b)(2)(B)(ii)(I)(aa)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end ‘‘and the
terms ‘health insurance coverage’ and
‘health insurance issuer’ have the meanings
given such terms in section 733(b)’’.
AMENDMENT.—Section
(D)
TECHNICAL
408(b)(2)(B)(ii)(I)(aa) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C.
1108(b)(2)(B)(ii)(I)(aa)) is amended by inserting ‘‘in’’ after ‘‘defined’’.
AUTHORITY.—Section
(E)
REGULATORY
408(b)(2)(B)(iii) of such Act (29 U.S.C.
1108(b)(2)(B)(iii)) is amended, in the matter
preceding subclause (I), by inserting ‘‘(in accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary addressing time, manner, and content
of such disclosures)’’, after ‘‘following’’.
SEC. 6703. INCREASING TRANSPARENCY IN GENERIC DRUG APPLICATIONS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 505(j)(3) of the

Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21
U.S.C. 355(j)(3)) is amended by adding at the
end the following:
‘‘(H)(i) Upon request (in controlled correspondence or an analogous process) by a
person that has submitted or intends to submit an abbreviated application under this
subsection for a drug that is required by regulation to contain one or more of the same

PO 00000

Frm 00122

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

inactive ingredients in the same concentrations as the listed drug referred to, or for
which the Secretary determines there is a
scientific justification for an approach that
is in vitro, in whole or in part, to be used to
demonstrate bioequivalence for a drug if
such a drug contains one or more of the same
inactive ingredients in the same concentrations as the listed drug referred to, the Secretary shall inform the person whether such
drug is qualitatively and quantitatively the
same as the listed drug. The Secretary may
also provide such information to such a person on the Secretary’s own initiative during
the review of an abbreviated application
under this subsection for such drug.
‘‘(ii) Notwithstanding section 301(j), if the
Secretary determines that such drug is not
qualitatively or quantitatively the same as
the listed drug, the Secretary shall identify
and disclose to the person—
‘‘(I) the ingredient or ingredients that
cause such drug not to be qualitatively or
quantitatively the same as the listed drug;
and
‘‘(II) for any ingredient for which there is
an identified quantitative deviation, the
amount of such deviation.
‘‘(iii) If the Secretary determines that such
drug is qualitatively and quantitatively the
same as the listed drug, the Secretary shall
not change or rescind such determination
after the submission of an abbreviated application for such drug under this subsection
unless—
‘‘(I) the formulation of the listed drug has
been changed and the Secretary has determined that the prior listed drug formulation
was withdrawn for reasons of safety or effectiveness; or
‘‘(II) the Secretary makes a written determination that the prior determination must
be changed because an error has been identified.
‘‘(iv) If the Secretary makes a written determination described in clause (iii)(II), the
Secretary shall provide notice and a copy of
the written determination to the person
making the request under clause (i).
‘‘(v) The disclosures authorized under
clauses (i) and (ii) are disclosures authorized
by law, including for purposes of section 1905
of title 18, United States Code. This subparagraph shall not otherwise be construed to authorize the disclosure of nonpublic qualitative or quantitative information about the
ingredients in a listed drug, or to affect the
status, if any, of such information as trade
secret or confidential commercial information for purposes of section 301(j) of this Act,
section 552 of title 5, United States Code, or
section 1905 of title 18, United States Code.’’.
(b) GUIDANCE.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than one year
after the date of enactment of this Act, the
Secretary of Health and Human Services
shall issue draft guidance, or update guidance, describing how the Secretary will determine whether a drug is qualitatively and
quantitatively the same as the listed drug
(as such terms are used in section 505(j)(3)(H)
of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act,
as added by subsection (a)), including with
respect to assessing pH adjusters.
(2) PROCESS.—In issuing guidance under
this subsection, the Secretary of Health and
Human Services shall—
(A) publish draft guidance;
(B) provide a period of at least 60 days for
comment on the draft guidance; and
(C) after considering any comments received and not later than one year after the
close of the comment period on the draft
guidance, publish final guidance.
(c) APPLICABILITY.—Section 505(j)(3)(H) of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act,
as added by subsection (a), applies beginning

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

on the date of enactment of this Act, irrespective of the date on which the guidance
required by subsection (b) is finalized.
Æ

The Acting CHAIR. No further
amendment to the bill, as amended, is
in order except those printed in part B
of House Report 119–462. Each such further amendment may be offered only in
the order printed in the report, by a
Member designated in the report, shall
be considered read, shall be debatable
for the time specified in the report,
equally divided and controlled by the
proponent and an opponent, shall not
be subject to amendment, and shall not
be subject to a demand for division of
the question.
f

AMENDMENT NO. 1 OFFERED BY
MR. MASSIE
The Acting CHAIR. It is now in order
to consider amendment No. 1 printed
the part B of House Report 119–462.
Mr. MASSIE. Mr. Chair, I have an
amendment at the desk.
The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will
designate the amendment.
The text of the amendment is as follows:
At the end of Title I of Division D, insert
the following:
SEC. 195. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be used to implement section 24220 of the Infrastructure Investment
and Jobs Act (49 U.S.C. 30111 note).

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to
House Resolution 1014, the gentleman
from Kentucky (Mr. MASSIE) and a
Member opposed each will control 5
minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Kentucky.
b 1300
Mr. MASSIE. Mr. Chair, I rise in support of our amendment. This is cosponsored by the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. PERRY) and the gentleman
from Texas (Mr. ROY). I regret that we
have to offer this amendment.
What I am going to describe will
probably sound like a bad science fiction movie, but that is what is written
into law. Right now, in law that is
going to be implemented, it says, for
2026 and beyond—now, the reality is
that technology doesn’t exist, but that
doesn’t keep legislators from imagining things that they would like to do
to infringe on civil liberties. However,
there is a law that states that every
vehicle manufactured is going to have
to have a kill switch in it.
The car itself will monitor your driving, and if the car thinks that you are
not doing a good job driving, it will disable itself, so the car dashboard becomes your judge, your jury, and your
executioner.
Imagine this: We have a snowstorm
coming. A mom takes her kids out to
go to the grocery store. It is snowing,
and they are trying to get some groceries before the big storm hits. She
swerves for a pothole. The neighbor’s
pet gets in the way, and she swerves for

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:04 Jan 23, 2026

H1297

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

that. A first responder goes by. She
pulls over.
Her car says: You have one more
swerve, and then we are going to
ground you. There it is, the next thing
she has to avoid, an icy patch in the
road. The car has adjudicated her as
unsuitable for driving. It disables the
vehicle, and there she is stranded.
My question is, how do you appeal
your sentence once the technology in
your car has judged you to be incapable
of driving? Once it has disabled you
and your children at the side of the
road, how do you appeal that? Do you
press a button on the dashboard? Do
you start talking to an AI?
What if it really was somebody who
was drunk? Are you really going to
send a police car after this disabled vehicle? Do we have the resources to do
that? There are going to be so many
false positives.
The technology is unworkable, which
is why the DOT is still in the rulemaking process, asking for feedback on
how this thing could even exist. It is
just a bad idea, but it is in law, so our
amendment would defund that.
Mr. Chair, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. CLYBURN. Mr. Chair, I rise in
opposition to the amendment.
The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman
from South Carolina is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. CLYBURN. Mr. Chair, the bipartisan infrastructure law requires drunk
and impaired driving technology to become standard equipment in new cars
once a rule has been finalized by the
Department of Transportation.
More than 30 people in the United
States die every day in drunk driving
crashes, and more than 12,000 people a
year suffer these preventable deaths.
Using the appropriations process to
delay or in any way impede the development of technology to prevent drunk
driving is inappropriate and reckless.
What we have before us today is a bipartisan, conferenced bill. It is already
a compromise from what Members on
both sides of the aisle wanted. Debating and attaching an amendment to
this bill risks the entire package.
Mr. Chair, I look forward to the time
when we can debate the substance of
this amendment because I have some
thoughts on the data that I want the
administration to be thinking about,
but the time for debate on the individual policies is not now.
This amendment, which could delay
the technology that would limit drunk
driving and save lives, is not the
amendment to support. This amendment should not be inserted into this
bipartisan bill at this point in the process.
I strongly oppose it and urge my colleagues to vote ‘‘no.’’ I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. MASSIE. Mr. Chairman, drunk
driving is a serious problem, but 31
States already have the technology to
keep drunk drivers off the road with ignition interlock devices that they can

PO 00000

Frm 00123

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

mandate. This technology that is in
the law is not going to fix the drunk
driving problem.
Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to
the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr.
PERRY), my friend.
Mr. PERRY. Mr. Chair, I thank the
gentleman from Kentucky for his work
on this, and of course the chairman of
the full committee for the hard work
on appropriations.
Look, none of us wants to be on the
road with drunk drivers. Of course, this
was a solution intended to deal with
them. All of us want them to be dealt
with.
I am going to remind everybody, as
my friend from Kentucky just said,
there is already legislation in multiple
States, dozens of States, that deals
with drunk drivers through the ignition interlock system. Probably in
your family somewhere, someone you
know, you have dealt with this. I know
in my family and the people I know, I
have dealt with it.
Here is what I don’t want to see in
America: Everybody, including the
ones who don’t drink and drive, being
punished for the people who drink and
drive. I happen not to drink, but I am
going to be forced to have this thing in
my car.
I am going to tell you what is next.
After what Representative MASSIE has
said, the car is going to be the judge,
jury, and sentencer for your crime in
the car. The next thing is going to be
that we need to hook this thing up to
the government so we can dispatch the
police.
I am just going to tell you what is
going to happen next. They are going
to be shutting your car off when they
decide whatever they decide from
wherever they decide it.
I don’t know what everyone thinks
about due process, the Constitution, ¥
the Fourth Amendment, and the right
to not be imposed upon by illegal, unlawful search and seizure, but punishing everybody for this crime, whether they have committed it or not,
whether they are going to commit it or
not, should be unconstitutional. This
shouldn’t really be a question.
We all want to get to the problem,
and we are happy to work with everybody on all sides to deal with it, but
you cannot punish and convict everybody in the country for the sake of the
ones who do things that they shouldn’t
do.
Mr. MASSIE. Mr. Chairman, may I
inquire as to how much time I have remaining.
The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman
from Kentucky has 15 seconds remaining.
Mr. MASSIE. Mr. Chair, I reserve the
balance of my time.
Mr. CLYBURN. Mr. Chair, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from New
Jersey (Mr. PALLONE), the distinguished ranking member of the Energy
and Commerce Committee.
Mr. PALLONE. Mr. Chairman, I rise
also in strong opposition to this
amendment.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.001

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1298

In 2023, 12,429 people died in drunk
driving crashes nationwide. In Kentucky alone, 198 people were killed. In
Pennsylvania, 321 people lost their
lives. These deaths were preventable.
Advanced drunk and impaired driving
prevention technology will prevent impaired drivers from illegally operating
vehicles and causing deaths and injuries. I understand that my Republican
colleagues are concerned about privacy, but the technology being developed does not track the vehicle’s location or collect, use, or store any data
that would compromise the privacy of
vehicle occupants.
Privacy is a concern, and my friends
should weigh in on the rulemaking
process. NHTSA, the agency involved
with this, should work with government agencies that have expertise in
this area to ensure that consumer data
is secure, anonymous, and protected
from unauthorized use. That can and
should be addressed as part of the rulemaking process.
It is not right, though. Preventing
impaired drivers from illegally operating vehicles and causing fatalities
should be a nonpartisan issue, and the
work on that needs to continue.
The problem here is that while
NHTSA has not finalized the rule, they
would not be able to do any work related to the rule or advanced alcohol
monitoring technology if this amendment passes. That is going to just
cause more deaths from drunk driving.
I would implore everybody: Please,
privacy can be addressed, but we
should not stop this work from continuing. We can’t have drunk drivers
on the road. It is not just them but everyone else who is killed and injured as
a result of those drunk drivers.
Mr. MASSIE. Mr. Chair, I would inquire whether the gentleman is prepared to close.
Mr. CLYBURN. Mr. Chair, I have one
additional speaker.
Mr. MASSIE. Mr. Chair, I reserve the
balance of my time.
Mr. CLYBURN. Mr. Chair, I yield 1
minute to the gentlewoman from New
York (Ms. GILLEN).
Ms. GILLEN. Mr. Chair, I rise in
strong opposition to this amendment.
Every day, 34 families lose a loved
one to a drunk driving crash. Drunk
driving remains the leading cause of
death on our highways. Unfortunately,
the problem is getting worse every
year, despite interlock devices.
Far too many Long Island families
know the pain of a life cut short. I
know several families who have lost
their children to drunk drivers.
Mr. Chair, these tragedies are absolutely preventable, and we know what
a solution is. The bipartisan HALT
Drunk Driving Act, which was passed
more than 4 years ago, would require
new vehicles to be equipped with this
new technology, and the change will
help save more than 10,000 lives each
year.
When
Transportation
Secretary
Duffy testified before the Transpor-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

tation and Infrastructure Committee
earlier this year, I asked him to work
with Congress to fully implement this
lifesaving law. I am proud to say that
thanks to my questioning, Secretary
Duffy publicly committed to implement this law and help save lives.
Mr. Chair, I am happy to work with
the gentlemen on the other side who
are concerned about privacy. Together,
we can implement technology that addresses their privacy concerns.
Mr. CLYBURN. Mr. Chair, may I inquire as to how much time I have remaining.
The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman
from Kentucky has 15 seconds remaining. The gentleman from South Carolina has 15 seconds remaining.
Mr. CLYBURN. Mr. Chair, I would
like to take that 15 seconds to thank
those who spoke in opposition to this
amendment, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. MASSIE. Mr. Chair, the last time
we offered this amendment, it had bipartisan support.
I urge my colleagues to vote for this
amendment. It would defund an unconstitutional and unworkable mandate
that has already missed the deadlines.
Mr. Chair, I yield back the balance of
my time.
The Acting CHAIR. The question is
on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Kentucky (Mr. MASSIE).
The question was taken; and the Acting Chair announced that the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. MASSIE. Mr. Chair, I demand a
recorded vote.
The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to
clause 6 of rule XVIII, further proceedings on the amendment offered by
the gentleman from Kentucky will be
postponed.
b 1310
AMENDMENT NO. 2 OFFERED BY MR. NORMAN

The Acting CHAIR. It is now in order
to consider amendment No. 2 printed in
part B of House Report 119–462.
Mr. NORMAN. Mr. Chair, I have an
amendment at the desk.
The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will
designate the amendment.
The text of the amendment is as follows:
On page 3, line 1 after ‘‘Act’’ insert ‘‘, except Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending as specified in
Division B,’’

The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to
House Resolution 1014, the gentleman
from South Carolina (Mr. NORMAN) and
a Member opposed each will control 5
minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from South Carolina.
Mr. NORMAN. Mr. Chair, I rise in
support of my amendment to strip out
the earmarks within the Labor, Health
and Human Services, and Education division from the underlying legislation.
This includes over 900 earmarks totaling nearly $1.4 billion in spending of
money we don’t have.
Mr. Chair, I yield 1 minute to the
gentleman from North Carolina (Mr.
HARRIS).

PO 00000

Frm 00124

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Mr. HARRIS of North Carolina. Mr.
Chair, I thank Representative NORMAN
for his amendment.
Mr. Chair, my constituents do not
send their hard-earned tax dollars to
Washington so that they can be funneled to abortion providers or hospitals
that mutilate children, yet that is exactly what many of these earmarks do.
A vote for this amendment will remove $3 million for Seattle Children’s
Hospital,
which
proudly
offers
transgender care to children. It would
strip $1 million to Lurie Children’s
Hospital in Chicago, which also provides transgender treatment to minors.
It would remove over $2 million to
Kittitas Valley Healthcare in Washington State, a facility that performs
chemical and surgical abortions even
after 20 weeks.
I realize some argue these dollars are
not directly paying for abortions or
gender surgeries, but when we give taxpayer handouts like these, we free up
resources for these exact practices.
I do not know how any Republican
can support keeping these special
handouts in this bill. While I wish my
original amendment was considered to
target the most egregious earmarks, I
still urge a ‘‘yes’’ vote.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I claim the
time in opposition to the amendment.
The Acting CHAIR. The gentlewoman
from Connecticut is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I yield myself 21⁄2 minutes.
Mr. Chair, before I get into the specifics of this amendment, I will start
with, hopefully, common ground.
In this Chamber, we can all agree
that Members know their districts
best. I asked a question. Isn’t that
right? Isn’t that what we always assert, that we know our districts best?
Further, we often hear, mostly from
the other side of the aisle, about how
unelected bureaucrats in Washington,
D.C., are making too many decisions
about Federal spending.
I don’t subscribe to that view because
true career civil servants work hard to
ensure that programs are executed according to the law, but if my friends on
the other side of the aisle want Congress to make more granular decisions
about spending, then that is exactly
what is happening through the community projects funding process, which we
have established.
This is not top down. It is bottom up,
and it has been enormously successful
since it has been implemented in the
last several years for both sides of the
aisle for communities all over this Nation.
It is not wasteful, porkbarrel spending, and my friends don’t get to have it
both ways.
Instead, it is a thoughtful process of
House Members and Senators talking
to their communities about their
needs, balancing those priorities, advocating for inclusion in these bills, and
delivering for their constituents in a
clear, transparent way.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.044

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

These community projects have been
posted online since last fall and no opposition has been raised. Yet at the
eleventh hour, it seems that some Republicans, once again, are attempting
to unravel a compromise by slashing
funding for healthcare services and
education programs for children and
for the needy.
Let me give you some examples.
The amendment would eliminate
funding to Seattle Children’s Hospital
for a behavioral health crisis stabilization unit. The underlying funding
would enable Seattle Children’s Hospital to create a dedicated space for
children needing immediate, shortterm psychiatric care.
The Acting CHAIR. The time of the
gentlewoman has expired.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Chair, the amendment would also
eliminate funding to the Ann & Robert
Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago
for a violence recovery and intervention program. The underlying funding
would serve pediatric victims of violence with trauma-informed mental
health and recovery services.
Should we not be doing that? Should
that not happen for that community?
The amendment would eliminate
funding to Rady Children’s Hospital in
San Diego for pediatric mental health
services. We have a mental health crisis in this Nation. It is particularly
poignant for children. It is not under
the radar any longer. It is out front.
The underlying funding is intended to
support mental health clinicians in pediatric primary care to improve care
for pediatric patients.
This amendment would eliminate
funding
for
the
Eastern
Maine
Healthcare Systems for maternal delivery and new infant projects to replace
and modernize equipment across hospitals with labor and delivery units.
This amendment would eliminate
funding for Dartmouth Health to construct a perinatal substance stabilization unit.
Let me repeat: Seattle Children’s
Hospital, the Ann & Robert Lurie Children’s Hospital, Rady’s Children’s Hospital, maternity delivery units, and a
perinatal substance use stabilization
unit are all at risk.
I will be clear that this amendment
is not limited to children’s hospitals. It
would eliminate funding to hospitals
and healthcare services that serve
young adults and adults, as well.
It will eliminate funding to the Denver Health and Hospital Authority for
infrastructure to allow the hospital to
continue to function as a medical safety net for the Denver community.
It will eliminate funding to Temple
University Hospital in Philadelphia to
purchase modern, diagnostic X-ray
technology equipment to strengthen
outpatient care.
The list goes on and on and on.
It would also eliminate funding for
K–12 education programs, higher education programs, and job training programs.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1299

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Mr. Chair, I urge a ‘‘no’’ vote on this
amendment, and I reserve the balance
of my time.
b 1320
Mr. NORMAN. Mr. Chair, I agree
with Ms. DELAURO. If the communities
want these, that is fine. They ought to
pay for them. I don’t know whether my
colleague realizes it or not, but we are
$39 trillion in debt and counting. Let
me just give my friend examples of
some of the things she may have not
thought about.
We have $1,599,000 for Eastern Maine
Healthcare Systems. It operates a pediatric gender clinic that provides sex-rejecting hormones for gender-diverse
and transgender children.
We have $4,008,000 for ChristianaCare
Health Services. It provides late-term
abortions through 23 weeks.
The Stroger Hospital in Illinois performs abortions through 13 weeks.
The Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago provides
transgender treatments.
Temple University Hospital in Pennsylvania provides transgender care for
adults.
Any of the communities that want
this should put their money up to pay
for it. The taxpayers cannot afford it.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from Georgia (Mr. CLYDE).
Mr. CLYDE. Mr. Chair, I rise today
in support of Representative NORMAN’s
amendment, which would prevent my
constituents’ hard-earned taxpayer dollars from funding woke earmarks and
handouts to leftist NGOs that undermine President Trump’s agenda and,
alarmingly, support taxpayer-funded
transgender surgeries for children.
Buried in the minibus package is
$14.3 million in earmarks for special interest projects across the country. At a
time when our national debt is skyrocketing well past $38 trillion, Members of Congress should be focused on
reining in wasteful spending and funding the essential functions of our government, not divisive handouts to
NGOs.
Particularly concerning are the millions of dollars in earmarks going to
so-called gender clinics and hospitals
that push puberty blockers, cross-sex
hormones, and even perform life-altering surgeries on vulnerable children.
This is not healthcare funding. This
is not healthcare. It is promoting an
ideology that harms children, sidelines
parents, ignores common sense, and
contradicts President Trump’s executive order to restore biological truth
and prevent the mutilation of our Nation’s children. Plain and simple:
Americans’ taxpayer dollars should not
be funding child mutilation.
The Acting CHAIR. The time of the
gentleman has expired.
Mr. NORMAN. Mr. Chair, I yield an
additional 15 seconds to the gentleman
from Georgia.
Mr. CLYDE. Mr. Chair, I urge all my
colleagues to adopt Representative
NORMAN’s amendment to stop this
woke and weaponized funding.

PO 00000

Frm 00125

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Mr. NORMAN. Mr. Chair, may I inquire how as to much time is remaining.
The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman
from South Carolina has 13⁄4 minutes
remaining.
Mr. NORMAN. Mr. Chair, this is a
prime example of government gone
wild and government programs that
are using our money that I think the
majority of Americans would reject. If
now is not the time, I don’t know when
is. It will be too late when the investors stop buying our bonds and everything comes to a dead halt in America.
We can’t let that happen.
Mr. Chair, these earmarks are
against every conservative value that
is known. The intent of these is wrong.
The expenditure of these is wrong. Now
is the time we face it and put a stop to
these. This is just the first step in a
long stairway to get this country back
on a firm financial footing.
Mr. Chair, I yield back the balance of
my time.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, community projects have been successful. It is
Senators and Members of the House
talking to their communities about
their needs, balancing priorities, advocating for the inclusion of these bills,
and delivering for their constituents in
a clear and in a transparent way.
That is what we ought to be doing, is
delivering for our constituents about
the needs that they identify for all of
us. I urge a ‘‘no’’ vote on this amendment.
Mr. Chair, I yield back the balance of
my time.
The Acting CHAIR. The question is
on the amendment offered by the gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. NORMAN).
The question was taken; and the Acting Chair announced that the ayes appeared to have it.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Chair, I demand a
recorded vote.
The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to
clause 6 of rule XVIII, further proceedings on the amendment offered by
the gentleman from South Carolina
will be postponed.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Chair, I move that the
Committee do now rise.
The motion was agreed to.
Accordingly, the Committee rose;
and the Speaker pro tempore (Mr.
FULCHER) having assumed the chair,
Mr. WALBERG, Acting Chair of the
Committee of the Whole House on the
state of the Union, reported that that
Committee, having had under consideration the bill (H.R. 7148) making further consolidated appropriations for
the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes, had come
to no resolution thereon.
f

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to
House Resolution 1014, I call up the bill
(H.R. 7147) making further consolidated

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.047

H22JAPT1

H1300

appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other
purposes, and ask for its immediate
consideration in the House.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 1014, the
amendment specified in section 7 of
House Resolution 1014 is adopted and
the bill, as amended, is considered
read.
The text of the bill, as amended, is as
follows:
H.R. 7147
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled, That the following sums
in this Act are appropriated, out of any
money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for the fiscal year ending September
30, 2026.
TITLE I
DEPARTMENTAL MANAGEMENT, INTELLIGENCE, SITUATIONAL AWARENESS,
AND OVERSIGHT
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY AND EXECUTIVE
MANAGEMENT
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

For necessary expenses of the Office of the
Secretary and for executive management for
operations and support, $316,295,000, which
shall be for the purposes and in the amounts
specified in the ‘‘Final Bill’’ column for Office of the Secretary and Executive Management, Operations and Support, in the ‘‘Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026’’ table in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act), of which $14,050,000 of amounts made
available for Management and Oversight, Office of Health Security and $8,000,000 of
amounts made available for Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans shall remain available
until September 30, 2027: Provided, That
$5,000,000 shall be withheld from obligation
until the Secretary submits to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate responses to all
questions for the record for each hearing on
the fiscal year 2027 budget submission for the
Department of Homeland Security held by
such Committees prior to July 1: Provided
further, That not to exceed $15,000 shall be
for official reception and representation expenses.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

For necessary expenses of the Office of the
Secretary and for executive management for
procurement, construction, and improvements, $8,911,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2028.
MANAGEMENT DIRECTORATE
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

For necessary expenses of the Management
Directorate for operations and support, including
vehicle
fleet
modernization,
$1,690,380,000, which shall be for the purposes
and in the amounts specified in the ‘‘Final
Bill’’ column for Management Directorate,
Operations and Support, in the ‘‘Department
of Homeland Security Appropriations Act,
2026’’ table in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act): Provided, That not to exceed $2,000 shall be for
official reception and representation expenses.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

For necessary expenses of the Management
Directorate for procurement, construction,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

and improvements, $58,106,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2028.
FEDERAL PROTECTIVE SERVICE

The revenues and collections of security
fees credited to this account shall be available until expended for necessary expenses
related to the protection of federally owned
and leased buildings and for the operations
of the Federal Protective Service.
INTELLIGENCE, ANALYSIS, AND SITUATIONAL
AWARENESS
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

For necessary expenses of the Office of Intelligence and Analysis and the Office of
Homeland Security Situational Awareness
for operations and support, $340,819,000, of
which $121,274,000 shall remain available
until September 30, 2027: Provided, That not
to exceed $3,825 shall for be official reception
and representation expenses and not to exceed $2,000,000 is available for facility needs
associated with secure space at fusion centers, including improvements to buildings.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

For necessary expenses of the Office of Inspector General for operations and support,
$257,599,000, of which $20,000,000 shall be for
additional inspections and oversight of detention facilities and shall remain available
until September 30, 2027, and of which
$12,814,000 shall be for oversight of the execution of funds provided in Public Law 119–21:
Provided, That not to exceed $300,000 may be
used for certain confidential operational expenses, including the payment of informants,
to be expended at the direction of the Inspector General.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SEC. 101. (a) The Secretary of Homeland
Security shall submit a report not later than
October 15, 2026, to the Inspector General of
the Department of Homeland Security listing all grants and contracts awarded by any
means other than full and open competition
during fiscal years 2025 or 2026.
(b) The Inspector General shall review the
report required by subsection (a) to assess
departmental compliance with applicable
laws and regulations and report the results
of that review to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate not later than February 15,
2027.
SEC. 102. (a) Not later than 30 days after
the last day of each month, the Chief Financial Officer of the Department of Homeland
Security shall submit to the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate a monthly budget and
staffing report that includes total obligations of the Department for that month and
for the fiscal year at the appropriation and
program, project, and activity levels, by the
source year of the appropriation.
(b) The initial staffing report submitted
pursuant to subsection (a) shall be the baseline for which the Department of Homeland
Security may increase or decrease staffing
levels for any program, project, or activity
pursuant to section 503(a)(4) of this Act.
SEC. 103. (a) The Secretary of Homeland
Security, in consultation with the Secretary
of the Treasury, shall notify the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate of any proposed transfers of funds available under section
9705(g)(4)(B) of title 31, United States Code,
from the Department of the Treasury Forfeiture Fund to any agency within the Department of Homeland Security.
(b) None of the funds identified for such a
transfer may be obligated until the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate are notified of
the proposed transfer.

PO 00000

Frm 00126

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SEC. 104. All official costs associated with
the use of Government aircraft by Department of Homeland Security personnel to support official travel of the Secretary and the
Deputy Secretary shall be paid from
amounts made available for the Office of the
Secretary.
SEC. 105. (a) The Under Secretary for Management shall brief the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate not later than 45 days after
the end of each fiscal quarter on all Level 1
and Level 2 acquisition programs on the
Master Acquisition Oversight List between
Acquisition Decision Event and Full Operational Capability, including programs that
have been removed from such list during the
preceding quarter.
(b) For each such program, the briefing described in subsection (a) shall include—
(1) a description of the purpose of the program, including the capabilities being acquired and the component(s) sponsoring the
acquisition;
(2) the total number of units, as appropriate, to be acquired annually until procurement is complete under the current acquisition program baseline;
(3) the Acquisition Review Board status,
including—
(A) the current acquisition phase by increment, as applicable;
(B) the date of the most recent review; and
(C) whether the program has been paused
or is in breach status;
(4) a comparison between the initial Department-approved
acquisition
program
baseline cost, schedule, and performance
thresholds and objectives and the program’s
current such thresholds and objectives, if applicable;
(5) the lifecycle cost estimate, adjusted for
comparison to the Future Years Homeland
Security Program, including—
(A) the confidence level for the estimate;
(B) the fiscal years included in the estimate;
(C) a breakout of the estimate for the prior
five years, the current year, and the budget
year;
(D) a breakout of the estimate by appropriation account or other funding source;
and
(E) a description of and rationale for any
changes to the estimate as compared to the
previously approved baseline, as applicable,
and during the prior fiscal year;
(6) a summary of the findings of any independent verification and validation of the
items to be acquired or an explanation for
why no such verification and validation has
been performed;
(7) a table displaying the obligation of all
program funds by prior fiscal year, the estimated obligation of funds for the current fiscal year, and an estimate for the planned
carryover of funds into the subsequent fiscal
year;
(8) a listing of prime contractors and major
subcontractors; and
(9) narrative descriptions of risks to cost,
schedule, or performance that could result in
a program breach if not successfully mitigated.
(c) The Under Secretary for Management
shall submit each approved Acquisition Decision Memorandum for programs described in
this section to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate not later than five business
days after the date of approval of such
memorandum by the Under Secretary for
Management or the designee of the Under
Secretary for Management.
SEC. 106. (a) None of the funds made available to the Department of Homeland Security in this Act or prior appropriations Acts
may be obligated for any new pilot or demonstration unless the component or office

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.049

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

carrying out such pilot or demonstration has
documented the information described in
subsection (c).
(b) Prior to the obligation of any such
funds made available for ‘‘Operations and
Support’’ for a new pilot or demonstration,
the Under Secretary for Management shall
provide a report to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate on the information described
in subsection (c).
(c) The information required under subsections (a) and (b) for a pilot or demonstration shall include the following—
(1) documented objectives that are well-defined and measurable;
(2) an assessment methodology that details—
(A) the type and source of assessment data;
(B) the methods for, and frequency of, collecting such data; and
(C) how such data will be analyzed; and
(3) an implementation plan, including
milestones, cost estimates, and implementation schedules, including a projected end
date.
(d) Not later than 90 days after the date of
completion of a pilot or demonstration described in subsection (e), the Under Secretary for Management shall provide a report to the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate
detailing lessons learned, actual costs, any
planned expansion or continuation of the
pilot or demonstration, and any planned
transition of such pilot or demonstration
into an enduring program or operation.
(e) For the purposes of this section, a pilot
or demonstration program is a study, demonstration, experimental program, or trial
that—
(1) is a small-scale, short-term experiment
conducted in order to evaluate feasibility,
duration, costs, or adverse events, and improve upon the design of an effort prior to
implementation of a larger scale effort; and
(2) uses more than 10 full-time equivalents
or obligates, or proposes to obligate,
$5,000,000 or more, but does not include congressionally directed programs or enhancements and does not include programs that
were in operation as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
(f) For the purposes of this section, a pilot
or demonstration does not include any testing, evaluation, or initial deployment phase
executed under a procurement contract for
the acquisition of information technology
services or systems, or any pilot or demonstration carried out by a non-Federal recipient under any financial assistance agreement funded by the Department.
SEC. 107. (a) None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available by this Act may
be used by the Office of Intelligence and
Analysis of the Department of Homeland Security to conduct a covered activity (as defined by section 6303 of the Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2025 (division
F of Public Law 118–159)).
(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or superseding the authority of any official within the Department of
Homeland Security to conduct legal, privacy, civil rights, or civil liberties oversight
of the intelligence activities of the Office of
Intelligence and Analysis.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit, or to limit the authority
of, personnel of the Office of Intelligence and
Analysis of the Department of Homeland Security from sharing intelligence information
with, or receiving information from—
(1) foreign, State, local, tribal, or territorial governments (or any agency or subdivision thereof);
(2) the private sector; or

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1301

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

(3) other elements of the Federal Government, including the components of the Department of Homeland Security.
SEC. 108. (a) The Inspector General shall report to the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate
on a quarterly basis on oversight of the funding provided to the Department in Public
Law 119–21.
(b) The quarterly report required in subsection (a) shall include—
(1) a review of the spend plans for every
program, project, or activity funded by the
Department under Public Law 119–21, including the current status of obligated funds
compared to spend plan projections; and
(2) a summary of the audits being conducted on the Department’s contracting,
procurement, and acquisition activities resulting from Public Law 119–21.
(c) Beginning one year after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter,
the Inspector General shall submit a comprehensive report to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate on the audits, inspections,
and evaluations conducted on funds provided
and activities undertaken in Public Law 119–
21 and shall also provide recommendations in
such report on ways to improve effectiveness
and efficiency and prevent waste, fraud, and
abuse of such programs and funds.
SEC. 109. (a) For an additional amount for
‘‘Office of the Secretary and Executive Management—Operations and Support—Office of
the Secretary’’, $20,000,000, for the procurement, deployment, and operations of bodyworn cameras for agents and officers performing enforcement activities under 8
U.S.C. 1101 et seq.
(b) Within 30 days of the date of enactment
of this Act, the Secretary shall provide the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate a spend
plan for the execution of funding provided in
subsection (a).
TITLE II
SECURITY, ENFORCEMENT, AND
INVESTIGATIONS
U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT
(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For necessary expenses of U.S. Customs
and Border Protection for operations and
support, including the transportation of unaccompanied alien minors; the provision of
air and marine support to Federal, State,
local, and international agencies in the enforcement or administration of laws enforced
by the Department of Homeland Security; at
the discretion of the Secretary of Homeland
Security, the provision of such support to
Federal, State, and local agencies in other
law enforcement and emergency humanitarian efforts; the purchase and lease of up
to 7,500 (6,500 for replacement only) policetype vehicles; the purchase, maintenance, or
operation of marine vessels, aircraft, and unmanned aerial systems; and contracting with
individuals for personal services abroad;
$17,727,974,000; of which $3,274,000 shall be derived from the Harbor Maintenance Trust
Fund for administrative expenses related to
the collection of the Harbor Maintenance
Fee pursuant to section 9505(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C.
9505(c)(3))
and
notwithstanding
section
1511(e)(1) of the Homeland Security Act of
2002 (6 U.S.C. 551(e)(1)); of which $550,000,000
shall be available until September 30, 2027;
and of which such sums as become available
in the Customs User Fee Account, except
sums subject to section 13031(f)(3) of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act of 1985 (19 U.S.C. 58c(f)(3)), shall be derived from that account: Provided, That not

PO 00000

Frm 00127

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

to exceed $34,425 shall be for official reception and representation expenses: Provided
further, That not to exceed $150,000 shall be
available for payment for rental space in
connection with preclearance operations:
Provided further, That not to exceed $2,000,000
shall be for awards of compensation to informants, to be accounted for solely under
the certificate of the Secretary of Homeland
Security: Provided further, That not to exceed $2,500,000 may be transferred to the Bureau of Indian Affairs for the maintenance
and repair of roads on Native American reservations used by the U.S. Border Patrol.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

For necessary expenses of U.S. Customs
and Border Protection for procurement, construction, and improvements, including procurement of marine vessels, aircraft, and unmanned aerial systems, $222,886,000, which
shall be for the purposes and in the amounts
specified in the ‘‘Final Bill’’ column for U.S.
Customs and Border Protection, Procurement, Construction, and Improvements, in
the ‘‘Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026’’ table in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the
matter preceding division A of this consolidated Act), of which—
(1) amounts made available for Border Security Assets and Infrastructure, Trade and
Travel Assets and Infrastructure, Integrated
Operations Assets and Infrastructure, Mission Support Assets and Infrastructure, and
Radiological Detection Systems shall remain
available until September 30, 2028; and
(2) amounts made available for Construction and Facility Improvements shall remain
available until September 30, 2030.
U.S. IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS
ENFORCEMENT
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

For necessary expenses of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement for operations and support, including the purchase
and lease of up to 3,790 (2,350 for replacement
only) police-type vehicles; overseas vetted
units; and maintenance, minor construction,
and minor leasehold improvements at owned
and leased facilities; $10,036,362,000, which
shall be for the purposes and in the amounts
specified in the ‘‘Final Bill’’ column for U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Operations and Support, in the ‘‘Department of
Homeland Security Appropriations Act,
2026’’ table in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this consolidated Act), of
which—
(1) of the amounts made available for
Homeland Security Investigations—
(A) not less than $6,000,000 shall remain
available until expended for efforts to enforce laws against forced child labor;
(B) $46,696,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2027;
(C) not less than $3,000,000 is for paid apprenticeships for participants in the Human
Exploitation Rescue Operative Child-Rescue
Corps;
(D) not less than $15,000,000 shall be available for investigation of intellectual property rights violations, including operation of
the National Intellectual Property Rights
Coordination Center;
(E) $15,000,000 shall be available until expended for conducting special operations
under section 3131 of the Customs Enforcement Act of 1986 (19 U.S.C. 2801); and
(F) not to exceed $4,000,000 shall be for
awards of compensation to informants, to be
accounted for solely under the certificate of
the Secretary of Homeland Security;
(2) of the amounts made available for Enforcement and Removal Operations, not to

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.012

H22JAPT1

H1302

exceed $11,216,000 shall be available to fund
or reimburse other Federal agencies for the
costs associated with the care, maintenance,
and repatriation of smuggled aliens unlawfully present in the United States; and
(3) of the amounts made available under
this heading, $11,475 shall be for official reception and representation expenses.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

For necessary expenses of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement for procurement, construction, and improvements,
$5,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2028.
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

For necessary expenses of the Transportation Security Administration for operations and support, $10,635,434,000, of which
$300,000,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That not to exceed
$7,650 shall be for official reception and representation expenses: Provided further, That
security service fees authorized under section 44940 of title 49, United States Code,
shall be credited to this appropriation as offsetting collections and shall be available
only for aviation security: Provided further,
That the sum appropriated under this heading from the general fund shall be reduced on
a dollar-for-dollar basis as such offsetting
collections are received during fiscal year
2026 so as to result in a final fiscal year appropriation from the general fund estimated
at not more than $7,605,434,000.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

For necessary expenses of the Transportation Security Administration for procurement, construction, and improvements,
$330,230,000, to remain available until September 30, 2028.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

For necessary expenses of the Transportation Security Administration for research
and development, $24,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027.
COAST GUARD
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

For necessary expenses of the Coast Guard
for operations and support including the
Coast Guard Reserve; purchase or lease of
not to exceed 30 passenger motor vehicles,
which shall be for replacement only; purchase or lease of small boats for contingent
and emergent requirements (at a unit cost of
not more than $700,000) and repairs and service-life replacements, not to exceed a total of
$31,000,000; purchase, lease, or improvements
of boats necessary for overseas deployments
and activities; payments pursuant to section
156 of Public Law 97–377 (42 U.S.C. 402 note; 96
Stat. 1920); and recreation and welfare;
$11,272,401,000, of which $530,000,000 shall be
for defense-related activities; of which
$24,500,000 shall be derived from the Oil Spill
Liability Trust Fund to carry out the purposes of section 1012(a)(5) of the Oil Pollution
Act of 1990 (33 U.S.C. 2712(a)(5)); of which
$20,000,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2028; of which $25,335,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2030, for
environmental compliance and restoration;
and of which $400,000,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027, which shall
only be available for depot level maintenance: Provided, That not to exceed $23,000
shall be for official reception and representation expenses.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

For necessary expenses of the Coast Guard
for procurement, construction, and improve-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

ments, including aids to navigation, shore
facilities (including facilities at Department
of Defense installations used by the Coast
Guard), and vessels and aircraft, including
equipment related thereto, $991,872,000, to remain available until September 30, 2030; of
which $20,000,000 shall be derived from the
Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund to carry out
the purposes of section 1012(a)(5) of the Oil
Pollution Act of 1990 (33 U.S.C. 2712(a)(5)).
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

For necessary expenses of the Coast Guard
for research and development; and for maintenance, rehabilitation, lease, and operation
of facilities and equipment; $6,763,000, to remain available until September 30, 2028, of
which $500,000 shall be derived from the Oil
Spill Liability Trust Fund to carry out the
purposes of section 1012(a)(5) of the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 (33 U.S.C. 2712(a)(5)): Provided, That there may be credited to and
used for the purposes of this appropriation
funds received from State and local governments, other public authorities, private
sources, and foreign countries for expenses
incurred for research, development, testing,
and evaluation.
RETIRED PAY

For retired pay, including the payment of
obligations otherwise chargeable to lapsed
appropriations for this purpose, payments
under the Retired Serviceman’s Family Protection and Survivor Benefits Plans, payment for career status bonuses, payment of
continuation pay under section 356 of title
37, United States Code, concurrent receipts,
combat-related special compensation, and
payments for medical care of retired personnel and their dependents under chapter 55
of title 10, United States Code, $1,249,000,000,
to remain available until expended.
UNITED STATES SECRET SERVICE
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

For necessary expenses of the United
States Secret Service for operations and support, including purchase of not to exceed 652
vehicles for police-type use; hire of passenger
motor vehicles; purchase of motorcycles
made in the United States; hire of aircraft;
rental of buildings in the District of Columbia; fencing, lighting, guard booths, and
other facilities on private or other property
not in Government ownership or control, as
may be necessary to perform protective
functions; conduct of and participation in
firearms matches; presentation of awards;
conduct of behavioral research in support of
protective intelligence and operations; payment in advance for commercial accommodations as may be necessary to perform
protective functions; and payment, without
regard to section 5702 of title 5, United
States Code, of subsistence expenses of employees who are on protective missions,
whether at or away from their duty stations;
$3,128,304,000, of which $96,299,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027, and
of which $20,000,000 shall remain available
until September 30, 2028; and of which
$6,000,000 shall be for a grant for activities
related to investigations of missing and exploited children; and of which up to
$33,000,000 may be for calendar year 2025 premium pay in excess of the annual equivalent
of the limitation on the rate of pay contained in section 5547(a) of title 5, United
States Code, pursuant to section 2 of the
Overtime Pay for Protective Services Act of
2016 (5 U.S.C. 5547 note), as last amended by
Public Law 118–38: Provided, That not to exceed $19,125 shall be for official reception and
representation expenses: Provided further,
That not to exceed $100,000 shall be to provide technical assistance and equipment to
foreign law enforcement organizations in
criminal investigations within the jurisdiction of the United States Secret Service.

PO 00000

Frm 00128

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

For necessary expenses of the United
States Secret Service for procurement, construction, and improvements, $118,517,000, of
which $96,167,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2028, and of which $22,350,000
shall remain available until September 30,
2030.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

For necessary expenses of the United
States Secret Service for research and development, $3,250,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2027.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SEC. 201. Section 201 of the Department of
Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2018
(division F of Public Law 115–141), related to
overtime compensation limitations, shall
apply with respect to funds made available
in this Act in the same manner as such section applied to funds made available in that
Act, except that ‘‘fiscal year 2026’’ shall be
substituted for ‘‘fiscal year 2018’’.
SEC. 202. Funding made available under the
headings ‘‘U.S. Customs and Border Protection—Operations and Support’’ and ‘‘U.S.
Customs and Border Protection—Procurement, Construction, and Improvements’’
shall be available for customs expenses when
necessary to maintain operations and prevent adverse personnel actions in Puerto
Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, in addition
to funding provided by sections 740 and 1406i
of title 48, United States Code.
SEC. 203. As authorized by section 601(b) of
the United States-Colombia Trade Promotion Agreement Implementation Act
(Public Law 112–42), fees collected from passengers arriving from Canada, Mexico, or an
adjacent
island
pursuant
to
section
13031(a)(5) of the Consolidated Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (19 U.S.C.
58c(a)(5)) shall be available until expended.
SEC. 204. (a) For an additional amount for
‘‘U.S. Customs and Border Protection—Operations and Support’’, $31,000,000, to remain
available until expended, to be reduced by
amounts collected and credited to this appropriation in fiscal year 2026 from amounts
authorized to be collected by section 286(i) of
the Immigration and Nationality Act (8
U.S.C. 1356(i)), section 10412 of the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (7
U.S.C. 8311), and section 817 of the Trade Facilitation and Trade Enforcement Act of 2015
(Public Law 114–125), or other such authorizing language.
(b) To the extent that amounts realized
from such collections exceed $31,000,000,
those amounts in excess of $31,000,000 shall
be credited to this appropriation, to remain
available until expended.
SEC. 205. None of the funds made available
in this Act for U.S. Customs and Border Protection may be used to prevent an individual
not in the business of importing a prescription drug (within the meaning of section
801(g) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act) from importing a prescription
drug from Canada that complies with the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act: Provided, That this section shall apply only to
individuals transporting on their person a
personal-use quantity of the prescription
drug, not to exceed a 90-day supply: Provided
further, That the prescription drug may not
be—
(1) a controlled substance, as defined in
section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act
(21 U.S.C. 802); or
(2) a biological product, as defined in section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42
U.S.C. 262).
SEC. 206. (a) Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, none of the funds provided

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.012

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

in this or any other Act shall be used to approve a waiver of the navigation and vesselinspection laws pursuant to section 501(b) of
title 46, United States Code, for the transportation of crude oil distributed from and to
the Strategic Petroleum Reserve until the
Secretary of Homeland Security, after consultation with the Secretaries of the Departments of Energy and Transportation and representatives from the United States flag
maritime industry, takes adequate measures
to ensure the use of United States flag vessels.
(b) The Secretary shall notify the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate, the Committee
on Transportation and Infrastructure of the
House of Representatives, and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate within two business
days of any request for waivers of navigation
and vessel-inspection laws pursuant to section 501(b) of title 46, United States Code,
with respect to such transportation, and the
disposition of such requests.
SEC. 207. (a) Beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall not—
(1) establish, collect, or otherwise impose
any new border crossing fee on individuals
crossing the Southern border or the Northern border at a land port of entry; or
(2) conduct any study relating to the imposition of a border crossing fee.
(b) In this section, the term ‘‘border crossing fee’’ means a fee that every pedestrian,
cyclist, and driver and passenger of a private
motor vehicle is required to pay for the
privilege of crossing the Southern border or
the Northern border at a land port of entry.
SEC. 208. (a) Not later than 90 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection shall submit an expenditure plan for
any amounts made available for ‘‘U.S. Customs and Border Protection—Procurement,
Construction, and Improvements’’ in this
Act and prior Acts to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate.
(b) No such amounts provided in this Act
may be obligated prior to the submission of
such plan.
SEC. 209. (a) Funds made available in this
Act may be used to alter operations within
the National Targeting Center of U.S. Customs and Border Protection.
(b) None of the funds provided by this Act,
provided by previous appropriations Acts
that remain available for obligation or expenditure in fiscal year 2026, or provided
from any accounts in the Treasury of the
United States derived by the collection of
fees available to the components funded by
this Act, may be used to reduce anticipated
or planned vetting operations at existing locations unless specifically authorized by a
statute enacted after the date of enactment
of this Act.
SEC. 210. None of the funds made available
for Border Security Assets and Infrastructure under the heading ‘‘U.S. Customs and
Border Protection—Procurement, Construction, and Improvements’’ in this Act or prior
appropriations Acts shall be used for the procurement or deployment of surveillance systems that are not autonomous, as such term
is defined in section 90004 of Public Law 119–
21.
SEC. 211. The Secretary shall ensure that
the November 30, 2021, policy statement from
U.S. Customs and Border Protection titled
‘‘Policy Statement and Required Actions Regarding Pregnant, Postpartum, Nursing Individuals, and Infants in Custody,’’ or substantively similar standards of treatment developed in consultation with maternal and
pediatric health providers and experts, are in

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1303

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

effect and are fully implemented to safeguard the health, safety, and rights of pregnant women in U.S. Customs and Border Protection custody.
SEC. 212. None of the funds provided under
the heading ‘‘U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement—Operations and Support’’ may
be used to continue a delegation of law enforcement authority authorized under section 287(g) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1357(g)) if the Department
of Homeland Security Inspector General determines that the terms of the agreement
governing the delegation of authority have
been materially violated.
SEC. 213. (a) None of the funds provided
under the heading ‘‘U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement—Operations and Support’’ may be used to continue any contract
for the provision of detention services if the
two most recent overall performance evaluations received by the contracted facility are
less than ‘‘adequate’’ or the equivalent median score in any subsequent performance
evaluation system.
(b) The performance evaluations referenced
in subsection (a) shall be conducted by the
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
Office of Professional Responsibility.
SEC. 214. Without regard to the limitation
as to time and condition of section 503(d) of
this Act, the Secretary may reprogram within and transfer funds to ‘‘U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement—Operations and
Support’’ as necessary to ensure the detention of aliens prioritized for removal.
SEC. 215. The reports required to be submitted under section 216 of the Department
of Homeland Security Appropriations Act,
2021 (division F of Public Law 116–260) shall
continue to be submitted semimonthly and
each matter required to be included in such
reports by such section 216 shall apply in the
same manner and to the same extent during
the period described in such section 216.
SEC. 216. The terms and conditions of sections 216 and 217 of the Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2020 (division D of Public Law 116–93) shall apply to
this Act.
SEC. 217. (a) Not later than 30 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement shall provide a briefing and submit an initial, written obligation plan for
funding provided under the heading ‘‘U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement’’ in
this or any other Act, including prior Acts,
to the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate,
which shall—
(1) be delineated by month, level II program, project, and activity, and pay and nonpay requirements;
(2) incorporate and delineate all funding
sources available to U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement, to include unobligated carryover balances and fees; and
(3) contain data-driven assumptions for
major contract costs, projected personnel
levels, and operational and policy considerations.
(b) The Director of U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement shall provide monthly
briefings and written updates to the plan required in subsection (a), which shall include,
at a minimum, the following information as
of the conclusion of the preceding month—
(1) actual obligations and expenditures, including prior year;
(2) carryover from prior year unobligated
balances;
(3) resource projections for the remainder
of the fiscal year;
(4) payroll projections for the remainder of
the fiscal year, based on forecasted gains and
losses;

PO 00000

Frm 00129

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(5) identification of any contracts with a
period of performance extending beyond the
current fiscal year;
(6) obligations and expenditures for specific domestic and international investigative mission areas, including countering
fentanyl and child exploitation;
(7) the rate of operations for the Custody
Operations, Alternatives to Detention, and
Transportation and Removal Operations programs, projects, and activities, which shall
include a projection of the exhaustion of
funds based on current resources and operational levels; and
(8) the initial obligation plan as described
in subsection (a), displayed unchanged for
the purposes of comparison.
(c) The monthly updates required by subsection (b) shall be submitted no later than
15 days after the beginning of the month following the submission of the initial obligation plan as described in subsection (a).
(d)(1) For an additional amount for ‘‘U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement—Operations and Support—Executive Leadership
and Oversight’’, $100,000, which shall be made
available for Mission Support—Executive
Leadership and Oversight on the sixteenth
day of each month, in a total amount for the
fiscal year not to exceed $700,000.
(2) Beginning 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, amounts in paragraph
(1) shall only be made available for obligation in a given month if the reporting requirements set forth in subsections (a) and
(b) of this section are provided to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate within the
timeframe required pursuant to subsections
(a) and (c), respectively.
SEC. 218. (a) Not later than 90 days after
the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement shall submit to the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate a written execution
plan for the funding provided by Public Law
119–21 for detention facilities, to include the
following elements:
(1) the location, number of beds, and estimated cost per bed of each detention facility
utilized by or on behalf of U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement in the preceding
quarter;
(2) the location, number of beds, and estimated cost per bed of each detention facility
projected to be utilized by or on behalf of
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
in the subsequent quarter;
(3) the total number of beds projected to be
utilized by or on behalf of U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement through the end
of the fiscal year;
(4) any associated increase or decrease in
transportation and removal operations cost
estimates associated with paragraphs (1), (2),
and (3) of this section, to include removal
flights; and
(5) a general overview of the desired geographic end-state for detention facilities,
any new operational models or strategies related to detention capacity that will be utilized, and a comparison of current detention
capacity against projected end-state capacity.
(b)(1) Subsequent to the submission of the
written execution plan provided in subsection (a), the Director of U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement shall provide to
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate a
briefing and written update to such execution plan not later than 30 days following the
end of each fiscal quarter; and
(2) each briefing and written update described in paragraph (1) shall include a review of the execution of funds for the most
recently completed quarter, a comparison of

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.012

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1304

the actual execution of funds in relation to
the planned execution of funds, and any remedial actions taken in the case of a failure
to execute funding in accordance with the
initial execution plan as described in subsection (a); and
(c) The initial execution plan described in
subsection (a) shall be displayed unchanged
for purposes of comparison in the briefings
and written updates described in subsection
(b).
SEC. 219. (a) None of the funds made available by this Act or any other Act may be
used to reduce the presence of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement attachés or
liaisons at international U.S. embassies or
consulates for the purposes of international
investigations or partnerships with foreign
law enforcement.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply to a reduction of presence in a specific country if—
(1) the Secretary of Homeland Security, in
collaboration with the Secretary of State,
provides a written explanation of how maintaining a collaborative investigatory presence in a specific country undermines U.S.
foreign policy interests in that country to
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate; or
(2) a country requests the cessation of collaborative law enforcement activities performed by the attaché or liaison stationed at
the embassy or consulate to their country.
SEC. 220. (a) Members of the United States
House of Representatives and the United
States Senate, including the leadership; the
heads of Federal agencies and commissions,
including the Secretary, Deputy Secretary,
Under Secretaries, and Assistant Secretaries
of the Department of Homeland Security;
the United States Attorney General, Deputy
Attorney General, Assistant Attorneys General, and the United States Attorneys; and
senior members of the Executive Office of
the President, including the Director of the
Office of Management and Budget, shall not
be exempt from Federal passenger and baggage screening.
(b) None of the funds made available in
this or any other Act, including prior Acts,
or provided from any accounts in the Treasury of the United States derived by the collection of fees available to the components
funded by this Act may be used to carry out
legislation altering the applicability of the
screening requirements outlined in subsection (a).
SEC. 221. Notwithstanding section 44923 of
title 49, United States Code, for fiscal year
2026, any funds in the Aviation Security Capital Fund established by section 44923(h) of
title 49, United States Code, may be used for
the procurement and installation of explosives detection systems or for the issuance of
other transaction agreements for the purpose of funding projects described in section
44923(a) of such title.
SEC. 222. Not later than 45 days after the
submission of the President’s budget proposal, the Administrator of the Transportation Security Administration shall submit
to the Committees on Appropriations and
Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the Committees on Appropriations and Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a single report that
fulfills the following requirements:
(1) a Capital Investment Plan, both constrained and unconstrained, that includes a
plan for continuous and sustained capital investment in new, and the replacement of
aged, transportation security equipment;
(2) the 5-year technology investment plan
as required by section 1611 of title XVI of the
Homeland Security Act of 2002, as amended
by section 3 of the Transportation Security
Acquisition Reform Act (Public Law 113–245);
and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

(3) the Advanced Integrated Passenger
Screening Technologies report as required by
the Senate Report accompanying the Department of Homeland Security Appropriations
Act, 2019 (Senate Report 115–283).
SEC. 223. Section 515(b) of Public Law 108–
334 (49 U.S.C. 44945 note) is amended by striking ‘‘report’’ each place it appears (including
in the subsection heading) and inserting
‘‘briefing’’ and by striking ‘‘transmit to’’ and
inserting ‘‘provide’’.
SEC. 224. (a) None of the funds made available by this Act under the heading ‘‘Coast
Guard—Operations and Support’’ shall be for
expenses incurred for recreational vessels
under section 12114 of title 46, United States
Code, except to the extent fees are collected
from owners of yachts and credited to the
appropriation made available by this Act
under the heading ‘‘Coast Guard—Operations
and Support’’.
(b) To the extent such fees are insufficient
to pay expenses of recreational vessel documentation under such section 12114, and
there is a backlog of recreational vessel applications, personnel performing non-recreational vessel documentation functions
under subchapter II of chapter 121 of title 46,
United States Code, may perform documentation under section 12114.
SEC. 225. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Commandant of the Coast
Guard shall submit to the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate a future-years capital
investment plan as described in the second
proviso under the heading ‘‘Coast Guard—
Acquisition, Construction, and Improvements’’ in the Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2015 (Public Law
114–4), which shall be subject to the requirements in the third and fourth provisos under
such heading.
SEC. 226. None of the funds in this Act shall
be used to reduce the Coast Guard’s legacy
Operations Systems Center mission or its
government-employed or contract staff levels.
SEC. 227. None of the funds appropriated by
this Act may be used to conduct, or to implement the results of, a competition under Office of Management and Budget Circular A–
76 for activities performed with respect to
the Coast Guard National Vessel Documentation Center.
SEC. 228. Funds made available in this Act
may be used to alter operations within the
Civil Engineering Program of the Coast
Guard nationwide, including civil engineering units, facilities design and construction
centers, maintenance and logistics commands, and the Coast Guard Academy, except that none of the funds provided in this
Act may be used to reduce operations within
any civil engineering unit unless specifically
authorized by a statute enacted after the
date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 229. Amounts deposited into the Coast
Guard Housing Fund in fiscal year 2026 shall
be available until expended to carry out the
purposes of section 2946 of title 14, United
States Code, and shall be in addition to funds
otherwise available for such purposes.
SEC. 230. (a) For an additional amount for
‘‘Coast Guard—Procurement, Construction,
and Improvements’’, $98,000,000, to remain
available until September 30, 2030, for the
procurement and acquisition of MQ–9 aircraft and associated base stations, equipment related to such aircraft and associated
base stations, and program management for
such aircraft and base stations.
(b) None of the funds made available in
this Act or any other act may be used to procure or acquire long-range unmanned aircraft with kinetic capabilities or to equip
any long-range unmanned aircraft with kinetic capabilities.

PO 00000

Frm 00130

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SEC. 231. None of the funds made available
to the United States Coast Guard by this Act
may be available for implementation of
Force Design 2028 until the Coast Guard provides the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate
detailed briefings on the initiatives of organization, people, technology, and contracting
and acquisitions.
SEC. 232. The United States Secret Service
is authorized to obligate funds in anticipation of reimbursements from executive agencies, as defined in section 105 of title 5,
United States Code, for personnel receiving
training sponsored by the James J. Rowley
Training Center, except that total obligations at the end of the fiscal year shall not
exceed total budgetary resources available
under the heading ‘‘United States Secret
Service—Operations and Support’’ at the end
of the fiscal year.
SEC. 233. (a) None of the funds made available to the United States Secret Service by
this Act or by previous appropriations Acts
may be made available for the protection of
the head of a Federal agency other than the
Secretary of Homeland Security.
(b) The Director of the United States Secret Service may enter into agreements to
provide such protection on a fully reimbursable basis.
SEC. 234. For purposes of section 503(a)(3) of
this Act, up to $15,000,000 may be reprogrammed within ‘‘United States Secret Service—Operations and Support’’.
SEC. 235. Funding made available in this
Act for ‘‘United States Secret Service—Operations and Support’’ is available for travel of
United States Secret Service employees on
protective missions without regard to the
limitations on such expenditures in this or
any other Act if the Director of the United
States Secret Service or a designee notifies
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate 10
or more days in advance, or as early as practicable, prior to such expenditures.
SEC. 236. Of the amounts made available by
this Act under the heading ‘‘United States
Secret Service—Operations and Support’’,
$2,000,000, to remain available until expended, shall be distributed as a grant or cooperative agreement for existing National
Computer Forensics Institute facilities currently used by the United States Secret
Service to carry out activities under section
383 of title 6, United States Code.
SEC. 237. (a) Section 118 of the Treasury
and General Government Appropriations
Act, 2001 (5 U.S.C. 5547 note) is amended, in
the first sentence, by inserting ‘‘(or, for 2024,
to the extent that such aggregate amount
would exceed the per annum rate of salary
payable under section 104 of title 3, United
States Code)’’ before the period at the end.
(b) Subsection (a) shall take effect as if enacted on December 31, 2023.
(c) Not later than 180 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter through 2028, the Director shall submit
to the Committee on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate; the
Committee on Homeland Security, the Committee on Oversight and Accountability, and
the Committee on the Judiciary of the House
of Representatives; and the Committee on
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, and the Committee on the Judiciary of
the Senate of Congress a report describing
the steps that the United States Secret Service is taking to address the increased protective service demands placed upon United
States Secret Service personnel.
(d) Each report required under subparagraph (c) shall include the following:
(1) An analysis of the current (as of the
date on which the report is submitted) operational demands and staffing levels with respect to the United States Secret Service.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.012

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

(2) Recommended strategies for reducing
overtime requirements for United States Secret Service personnel, including—
(i) the appointment of additional personnel;
(ii) solutions such that sufficient resources
are available throughout each year without
the need for exceptions to, or waivers of, premium pay limitations;
(iii) the redistribution of workload among
United States Secret Service personnel; and
(iv) other improvements in operational efficiency with respect to the United States
Secret Service.
(e) Within the reports required under paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 2(c) of the Overtime Pay for Protective Services Act of 2023
(Public Law 118–38; 138 Stat. 13) that are submitted after the date of enactment of this
Act, the Director shall include information
about—
(1) the average number of overtime hours
and range of number of overtime hours completed by United States Secret Service personnel receiving premium pay above the pay
limitation in subsection (a) of section 5547 of
title 5, United States Code; and
(2) the average number of overtime hours
and range of number of overtime hours completed by United States Secret Service personnel who are not fully compensated for
their overtime because their premium pay
would be above the pay limitation in section
2 of the Overtime Pay Protection Act of 2016
(5 U.S.C. 5547 note).
(f) The matter preceding the first proviso
under the heading ‘‘United States Secret
Service—Operations and Support’’ in division C of Public Law 118–47 shall be applied
to funds appropriated by this Act by substituting ‘‘$40,000,000’’ for ‘‘$24,000,000’’ and
substituting ‘‘2024’’ for ‘‘2023’’.
SEC. 238. Section 211 of the Department of
Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2021
(division F of Public Law 116–260), prohibiting the use of funds for the construction of
fencing in certain areas, shall apply with respect to funds made available in this Act in
the same manner as such section applied to
funds made available in that Act.
TITLE III
PROTECTION, PREPAREDNESS,
RESPONSE, AND RECOVERY
CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
SECURITY AGENCY
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

For necessary expenses of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency for
operations and support, $2,218,634,000, which
shall be for the purposes and in the amounts
specified in the ‘‘Final Bill’’ column for Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency, Operations and Support in the ‘‘Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026’’ table in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act), of which amounts made available for
Risk Management Operations, National Infrastructure Simulation Analysis Center
shall remain available until September 30,
2027: Provided, That not to exceed $3,825 shall
be for official reception and representation
expenses.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

IMPROVEMENTS

For necessary expenses of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency for
procurement, construction, and improvements, $386,464,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2028.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

For necessary expenses of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for oper-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1305

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

ations and support, $1,667,038,000: Provided,
That not less than $3,000,000 shall be for the
Emergency Management Assistance Compact: Provided further, That not to exceed
$2,250 shall be for official reception and representation expenses.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

For necessary expenses of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for procurement, construction, and improvements,
$156,419,000, of which $92,794,000 shall remain
available until September 30, 2028, and of
which $63,625,000 shall remain available until
September 30, 2030.
FEDERAL ASSISTANCE

For activities of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for Federal assistance
through
grants,
contracts,
cooperative
agreements,
and
other
activities,
$3,836,748,513, which shall be allocated as follows:
(1) $494,000,000 for the State Homeland Security Grant Program under section 2004 of
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C.
605), of which $85,500,000 shall be for Operation Stonegarden and $14,250,000 shall be for
Tribal Homeland Security Grants under section 2005 of the Homeland Security Act of
2002 (6 U.S.C. 606): Provided, That notwithstanding subsection (c)(4) of such section
2004, for fiscal year 2026, the Commonwealth
of Puerto Rico shall make available to local
and tribal governments amounts provided to
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico under
this paragraph in accordance with subsection
(c)(1) of such section 2004.
(2) $584,250,000 for the Urban Area Security
Initiative under section 2003 of the Homeland
Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 604).
(3) $300,000,000 for the Nonprofit Security
Grant Program under section 2009 of the
Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C.
609a), of which $150,000,000 is for eligible recipients located in high-risk urban areas
that receive funding under section 2003 of
such Act and $150,000,000 is for eligible recipients that are located outside such areas: Provided, That eligible recipients are those described in section 2009(b) of such Act (6
U.S.C. 609a(b)) or are an otherwise eligible
recipient at risk of a terrorist or other extremist attack.
(4) $99,750,000 for Public Transportation Security Assistance, Railroad Security Assistance, and Over-the-Road Bus Security Assistance under sections 1406, 1513, and 1532 of
the Implementing Recommendations of the
9/11 Commission Act of 2007 (6 U.S.C. 1135,
1163, and 1182), of which $9,500,000 shall be for
Amtrak security and $1,900,000 shall be for
Over-the-Road Bus Security: Provided, That
such public transportation security assistance shall be provided directly to public
transportation agencies.
(5) $95,000,000 for Port Security Grants in
accordance with section 70107 of title 46,
United States Code.
(6) $684,000,000, to remain available until
September 30, 2027, of which $342,000,000 shall
be for Assistance to Firefighter Grants and
$342,000,000 shall be for Staffing for Adequate
Fire and Emergency Response Grants under
sections 33 and 34 respectively of the Federal
Fire Prevention and Control Act of 1974 (15
U.S.C. 2229 and 2229a).
(7) $337,250,000 for emergency management
performance grants under the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4001 et
seq.), the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief
and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C.
5121), the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act
of 1977 (42 U.S.C. 7701), section 762 of title 6,
United States Code, and Reorganization Plan
No. 3 of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.).
(8) $297,113,000 for necessary expenses for
Flood Hazard Mapping and Risk Analysis, in

PO 00000

Frm 00131

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

addition to and to supplement any other
sums appropriated under the National Flood
Insurance Fund, and such additional sums as
may be provided by States or other political
subdivisions for cost-shared mapping activities under section 1360(f)(2) of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C.
4101(f)(2)), to remain available until expended.
(9) $11,400,000 for Regional Catastrophic
Preparedness Grants.
(10) $11,400,000 for Rehabilitation of High
Hazard Potential Dams under section 8A of
the National Dam Safety Program Act (33
U.S.C. 467f–2).
(11) $123,500,000 for the emergency food and
shelter program under title III of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42
U.S.C. 11331), to remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That not to exceed
3.5 percent shall be for total administrative
costs.
(12) $48,000,000 for the Next Generation
Warning System.
(13) $272,671,513 for Community Project
Funding
and
Congressionally
Directed
Spending grants, which shall be for the purposes, and the amounts, specified in the
table entitled ‘‘Homeland Security—Community Project Funding/Congressionally Directed Spending’’ under the ‘‘Disclosure of
Earmarks and Congressionally Directed
Spending Items’’ heading in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act), of which—
(A) $82,957,854, in addition to amounts otherwise made available for such purpose, is for
emergency operations center grants under
section 614 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42
U.S.C. 5196c); and
(B) $189,713,659, in addition to amounts otherwise made available for such purpose, is for
pre-disaster mitigation grants under section
203 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief
and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C.
5133(e)), notwithstanding subsections (f), (g),
and (l) of that section (42 U.S.C. 5133(f), (g),
(l)).
(14) $478,414,000 to sustain current operations for training, exercises, technical assistance, and other programs, of which—
(A) $85,711,000 is for the Center for Domestic Preparedness;
(B) $17,100,000 is for the Center for Homeland Defense and Security;
(C) $33,366,000 is for the Emergency Management Institute;
(D) $72,140,000 is for the United States Fire
Administration;
(E) $95,950,000 is for the National Domestic
Preparedness Consortium;
(F) $15,200,000 is for Continuing Training
Grants;
(G) $21,266,000 is for the National Exercise
Program;
(H) $83,657,000 is for the Biological Support
Program;
(I) $34,465,000 is for the Securing the Cities
Program; and
(J) $19,559,000 is for Countering Weapons of
Mass Destruction Training, Exercises, and
Readiness.
DISASTER RELIEF FUND

For necessary expenses in carrying out the
Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5121 et seq.),
$26,367,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That such amount shall be
for major disasters declared pursuant to the
Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5121 et seq.)
and is designated by the Congress as being
for disaster relief pursuant to a concurrent
resolution on the budget.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.012

H22JAPT1

H1306
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE FUND

For activities under the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4001 et seq.),
the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 (42
U.S.C. 4001 et seq.), the Biggert-Waters Flood
Insurance Reform Act of 2012 (Public Law
112–141, 126 Stat. 916), and the Homeowner
Flood Insurance Affordability Act of 2014
(Public
Law
113–89;
128
Stat.
1020),
$226,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2027, which shall be derived from
offsetting amounts collected under section
1308(d) of the National Flood Insurance Act
of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4015(d)); of which $16,302,000
shall be available for mission support associated with flood management; and of which
$209,698,000 shall be available for flood plain
management and flood mapping: Provided,
That any additional fees collected pursuant
to section 1308(d) of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4015(d)) shall be
credited as offsetting collections to this account, to be available for flood plain management and flood mapping: Provided further,
That in fiscal year 2026, no funds shall be
available from the National Flood Insurance
Fund under section 1310 of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4017) in
excess of—
(1) $230,669,000 for operating expenses and
salaries and expenses associated with flood
insurance operations;
(2) $1,505,000,000 for commissions and taxes
of agents;
(3) such sums as are necessary for interest
on Treasury borrowings; and
(4) $175,000,000, which shall remain available until expended, for flood mitigation actions and for flood mitigation assistance
under section 1366 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4104c), notwithstanding sections 1366(e) and 1310(a)(7) of
such Act (42 U.S.C. 4104c(e), 4017):
Provided further, That the amounts collected
under section 102 of the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 (42 U.S.C. 4012a) and section 1366(e) of the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4104c(e)), shall be deposited in the National Flood Insurance Fund to
supplement other amounts specified as available for section 1366 of the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968, notwithstanding section 102(f)(8), section 1366(e) of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and paragraphs
(1) through (3) of section 1367(b) of such Act
(42 U.S.C. 4012a(f)(8), 4104c(e), 4104d(b)(1)–(3)):
Provided further, That total administrative
costs shall not exceed 4 percent of the total
appropriation: Provided further, That up to
$4,000,000 is available to carry out section 24
of the Homeowner Flood Insurance Affordability Act of 2014 (42 U.S.C. 4033).
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

(INCLUDING TRANSFERS OF FUNDS)

SEC. 301. Funds made available under the
heading ‘‘Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency—Operations and Support’’
may be made available for the necessary expenses of procuring or providing access to
cybersecurity threat feeds for branches,
agencies, independent agencies, corporations, establishments, and instrumentalities
of the Federal Government of the United
States, State, local, tribal, and territorial
entities, fusion centers as described in section 210A of the Homeland Security Act (6
U.S.C. 124h), and Information Sharing and
Analysis Organizations.
SEC. 302. (a) Notwithstanding section
2008(a)(12) of the Homeland Security Act of
2002 (6 U.S.C. 609(a)(12)) or any other provision of law, not more than 5 percent of the
amount of a grant made available in paragraphs (1) through (5) under ‘‘Federal Emergency Management Agency—Federal Assistance’’, may be used by the recipient for expenses directly related to administration of
the grant.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

(b) The authority provided in subsection
(a) shall also apply to a state recipient for
the administration of a grant under such
paragraph (3).
SEC. 303. (a) Applications for grants under
the heading ‘‘Federal Emergency Management Agency—Federal Assistance’’, for paragraphs (1) through (5), shall be made available to eligible applicants not later than 60
days after the date of enactment of this Act,
eligible applicants shall submit applications
not later than 80 days after the grant announcement, and the Administrator of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency
shall act within 65 days after the receipt of
an application.
(b) Amounts appropriated by this Act for
‘‘Federal Emergency Management Agency—
Operations and Support’’ shall be reduced by
$100,000 for each day past the 60-day requirement that applications are not made available to eligible applicants as required in subsection (a), and the amount made available
under such heading and specified in the ‘‘Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026’’ table in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this Consolidated
Act) for Mission Support shall be correspondingly reduced by an equivalent amount.
SEC. 304. (a) Under the heading ‘‘Federal
Emergency Management Agency—Federal
Assistance’’, for grants under paragraphs (1)
through (5), (9), and (10) the Administrator of
the Federal Emergency Management Agency
shall brief the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate five full business days in advance
of announcing publicly the intention of making an award.
(b) If any such public announcement is
made before five full business days have
elapsed following such briefing, $1,000,000 of
amounts appropriated by this Act for ‘‘Federal Emergency Management Agency—Operations and Support’’ shall be rescinded, and
the amount made available under such heading and specified in the ‘‘Department of
Homeland Security Appropriations Act,
2026’’ table in the explanatory statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding
division A of this Consolidated Act) for Mission Support shall be correspondingly reduced by an equivalent amount.
SEC. 305. Under the heading ‘‘Federal
Emergency Management Agency—Federal
Assistance’’, for grants under paragraphs (1)
and (2), the installation of communications
towers is not considered construction of a
building or other physical facility.
SEC. 306. The reporting requirements in
paragraphs (1) and (2) under the heading
‘‘Federal Emergency Management Agency—
Disaster Relief Fund’’ in the Department of
Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2015
(Public Law 114–4), related to reporting on
the Disaster Relief Fund, shall be applied in
fiscal year 2026 with respect to budget year
2027 and current fiscal year 2026, respectively—
(1) in paragraph (1) by substituting ‘‘fiscal
year 2027’’ for ‘‘fiscal year 2016’’; and
(2) in paragraph (2) by inserting ‘‘business’’
after ‘‘fifth’’.
SEC. 307. In making grants under the heading ‘‘Federal Emergency Management Agency—Federal Assistance’’, for Staffing for
Adequate Fire and Emergency Response
grants, the Administrator of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency may grant
waivers from the requirements in subsections (a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(B), (a)(1)(E), (c)(1),
(c)(2), and (c)(4) of section 34 of the Federal
Fire Prevention and Control Act of 1974 (15
U.S.C. 2229a).
SEC. 308. (a) The aggregate charges assessed during fiscal year 2026, as authorized
in title III of the Departments of Veterans

PO 00000

Frm 00132

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Affairs and Housing and Urban Development,
and Independent Agencies Appropriations
Act, 1999 (42 U.S.C. 5196e), shall not be less
than 100 percent of the amounts anticipated
by the Department of Homeland Security to
be necessary for its Radiological Emergency
Preparedness Program for the next fiscal
year.
(b) The methodology for assessment and
collection of fees shall be fair and equitable
and shall reflect costs of providing such services, including administrative costs of collecting such fees.
(c) Such fees shall be deposited in a Radiological Emergency Preparedness Program
account as offsetting collections and will become available for authorized purposes on
October 1, 2026, and remain available until
expended.
SEC. 309. In making grants under the heading ‘‘Federal Emergency Management Agency—Federal Assistance’’, for Assistance to
Firefighter Grants, the Administrator of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency
may waive subsection (k) of section 33 of the
Federal Fire Prevention and Control Act of
1974 (15 U.S.C. 2229).
SEC. 310. Any unobligated balances of funds
appropriated in any prior Act for activities
funded by the National Predisaster Mitigation Fund under section 203 of the Robert T.
Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5133), as in effect on
the day before the date of enactment of section 1234 of division D of Public Law 115–254,
shall be transferred to and merged with
funds set aside pursuant to subsection (i)(1)
of section 203 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act
(42 U.S.C. 5133), as in effect on the date of the
enactment of this section.
SEC. 311. Any unobligated balances of funds
appropriated under the heading ‘‘Federal
Emergency
Management
Agency—Flood
Hazard Mapping and Risk Analysis Program’’ in any prior Act shall be transferred
to and merged with funds appropriated under
the heading ‘‘Federal Emergency Management Agency—Federal Assistance’’ for necessary expenses for Flood Hazard Mapping
and Risk Analysis: Provided, That funds
transferred pursuant to this section shall be
in addition to and supplement any other
sums appropriated for such purposes under
the National Flood Insurance Fund and such
additional sums as may be provided by
States or other political subdivisions for
cost-shared mapping activities under section
1360(f)(2) of the National Flood Insurance Act
of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4101(f)(2)), to remain available until expended.
SEC. 312. Each award for grants under the
heading ‘‘Federal Emergency Management
Agency—Federal Assistance’’ for paragraphs
(1) through (10) and (12), shall have a period
of performance, as defined by 2 CFR 200.1,
that shall be of not less than three years and
not more than five years.
SEC. 313. (a) The Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall
post an interactive dashboard on the publicfacing website of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency with any request for reimbursement for a covered expense, delineated by state and any amount for individual
assistance or public assistance related to
emergency (42 U.S.C. 5122(1)) or major disaster (42 U.S.C. 5122(2)) declarations under
the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and
Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5121 et
seq.)—
(1) not more than 90 days after such information has been received by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency; and
(2) not more than 60 days after such information is under final review by the Department of Homeland Security.
(b) The information in the interactive
dashboard referenced in subsection (a) shall

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.012

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

include at a minimum the information listed
in subparagraphs (1) through (7) under the
heading in the paragraph titled ‘‘Public and
Individual Assistance’’ in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act).
SEC. 314. (a) None of the funds appropriated
in this Act may be used to pause a training
or grant funded under the heading ‘‘Federal
Emergency Management Agency—Federal
Assistance’’.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply if the
Secretary of Homeland Security notifies the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate not more
than 10 business days in advance of the
pause.
(c) The notification required by subsection
(b) shall include an explanation for the
pause, plans to make up any missed classes
resulting from the pause, and the budgetary
impact of any paused training.
(d) The Secretary may waive the requirement in subsection (b) in the event of extraordinary circumstances that imminently
threaten the safety of human life or the protection of property.
TITLE IV
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TRAINING,
AND SERVICES
U.S. CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION SERVICES
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

For necessary expenses of U.S. Citizenship
and Immigration Services for operations and
support, including for the E-Verify Program,
$122,941,000: Provided, That such amounts
shall be in addition to any other amounts
made available for such purposes, and shall
not be construed to require any reduction of
any fee described in section 286(m) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C.
1356(m)): Provided further, That not to exceed
$5,000 shall be for official reception and representation expenses.
FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING
CENTERS
OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

For necessary expenses of the Federal Law
Enforcement Training Centers for operations
and support, including the purchase of not to
exceed 117 vehicles for police-type use and
hire of passenger motor vehicles, and services as authorized by section 3109 of title 5,
United States Code, $379,837,000, of which
$75,551,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That not to exceed
$7,180 shall be for official reception and representation expenses.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

For necessary expenses of the Federal Law
Enforcement Training Centers for procurement, construction, and improvements,
$18,300,000, to remain available until September 30, 2030, for acquisition of necessary
additional real property and facilities, construction and ongoing maintenance, facility
improvements, and related expenses of the
Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY DIRECTORATE

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

For necessary expenses of the Science and
Technology Directorate for operations and
support, including the purchase or lease of
not to exceed 5 vehicles, $352,802,000, of which
$201,183,000 shall remain available until September 30, 2027: Provided, That not to exceed
$10,000 shall be for official reception and representation expenses.
PROCUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND
IMPROVEMENTS

For necessary expenses of the Science and
Technology Directorate for procurement,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1307

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

construction, and improvements, $51,500,000,
to remain available until September 30, 2030.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

For necessary expenses of the Science and
Technology Directorate for research and development, $426,904,000, to remain available
until September 30, 2028.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SEC. 401. (a) Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, funds otherwise made available to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services may be used to acquire, operate,
equip, and dispose of up to 5 vehicles, for replacement only, for areas where the Administrator of General Services does not provide
vehicles for lease.
(b) The Director of U.S. Citizenship and
Immigration Services may authorize employees who are assigned to those areas to
use such vehicles to travel between the employees’ residences and places of employment.
SEC. 402. None of the funds appropriated by
this Act may be used to process or approve a
competition under Office of Management and
Budget Circular A–76 for services provided by
employees (including employees serving on a
temporary or term basis) of U.S. Citizenship
and Immigration Services of the Department
of Homeland Security who are known as Immigration Information Officers, Immigration
Service Analysts, Contact Representatives,
Investigative Assistants, or Immigration
Services Officers.
SEC. 403. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any Federal funds made available to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services may be used for the collection and
use of biometrics taken at a U.S. Citizenship
and Immigration Services Application Support Center that is overseen virtually by
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
personnel using appropriate technology.
SEC. 404. The Director of the Federal Law
Enforcement Training Centers is authorized
to distribute funds to Federal law enforcement agencies for expenses incurred participating in training accreditation.
SEC. 405. The Federal Law Enforcement
Training Accreditation Board, including representatives from the Federal law enforcement community and non-Federal accreditation experts involved in law enforcement
training, shall lead the Federal law enforcement training accreditation process to continue the implementation of measuring and
assessing the quality and effectiveness of
Federal law enforcement training programs,
facilities, and instructors.
SEC. 406. (a) The Director of the Federal
Law Enforcement Training Centers may accept transfers to its ‘‘Procurement, Construction, and Improvements’’ account from
Government agencies requesting the construction of special use facilities, as authorized by the Economy Act (31 U.S.C. 1535(b)).
(b) The Federal Law Enforcement Training
Centers shall maintain administrative control and ownership upon completion of such
facilities.
SEC. 407. The functions of the Federal Law
Enforcement Training Centers instructor
staff shall be classified as inherently governmental for purposes of the Federal Activities
Inventory Reform Act of 1998 (31 U.S.C. 501
note).
TITLE V
GENERAL PROVISIONS
(INCLUDING TRANSFERS AND RESCISSIONS OF
FUNDS)

SEC. 501. No part of any appropriation contained in this Act shall remain available for
obligation beyond the current fiscal year unless expressly so provided herein.
SEC. 502. Subject to the requirements of
section 503 of this Act, the unexpended bal-

PO 00000

Frm 00133

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ances of prior appropriations provided for activities in this Act may be transferred to appropriation accounts for such activities established pursuant to this Act, may be
merged with funds in the applicable established accounts, and thereafter may be accounted for as one fund for the same time period as originally enacted.
SEC. 503. (a) None of the funds provided by
this Act, provided by previous appropriations
Acts to the components in or transferred to
the Department of Homeland Security that
remain available for obligation or expenditure in fiscal year 2026, or provided from any
accounts in the Treasury of the United
States derived by the collection of fees available to the components funded by this Act,
shall be available for obligation or expenditure through a reprogramming of funds
that—
(1) creates or eliminates a program,
project, or activity, or increases funds for
any program, project, or activity for which
funds have been denied or restricted by the
Congress;
(2) contracts out any function or activity
presently performed by Federal employees or
any new function or activity proposed to be
performed by Federal employees in the
President’s budget proposal for fiscal year
2026 for the Department of Homeland Security;
(3) augments funding for existing programs, projects, or activities in excess of
$5,000,000 or 10 percent, whichever is less;
(4) reduces funding for any program,
project, or activity, or numbers of personnel,
by 10 percent or more; or
(5) results from any general savings from a
reduction in personnel that would result in a
change in funding levels for programs,
projects, or activities as approved by the
Congress.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply if the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate are notified at least 30 days in advance of such reprogramming.
(c) Up to 5 percent of any appropriation
made available for the current fiscal year for
the Department of Homeland Security by
this Act or provided by previous appropriations Acts may be transferred between such
appropriations if the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate are notified at least 30 days
in advance of such transfer, but no such appropriation, except as otherwise specifically
provided, shall be increased by more than 10
percent by such transfer.
(d) Notwithstanding subsections (a), (b),
and (c), no funds shall be reprogrammed
within or transferred between appropriations—
(1) based upon an initial notification provided after June 15, except in extraordinary
circumstances that imminently threaten the
safety of human life or the protection of
property;
(2) to increase or decrease funding for
grant programs; or
(3) to create a program, project, or activity
pursuant to subsection (a)(1), including any
new function or requirement within any program, project, or activity, not approved by
Congress in the consideration of the enactment of this Act.
(e) The notification thresholds and procedures set forth in subsections (a), (b), (c), and
(d) shall apply to any use of deobligated balances of funds provided in previous Department of Homeland Security Appropriations
Acts that remain available for obligation in
the current year.
(f) Notwithstanding subsection (c), the Secretary of Homeland Security may transfer to
the fund established by 8 U.S.C. 1101 note, up
to $20,000,000 from appropriations available

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.012

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1308

to the Department of Homeland Security:
Provided, That the Secretary shall notify the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate at least 5
days in advance of such transfer.
SEC. 504. (a) Section 504 of the Department
of Homeland Security Appropriations Act,
2017 (division F of Public Law 115–31), related
to the operations of a working capital fund,
shall apply with respect to funds made available in this Act in the same manner as such
section applied to funds made available in
that Act.
(b) Funds from such working capital fund
may be obligated and expended in anticipation of reimbursements from components of
the Department of Homeland Security.
SEC. 505. (a) Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, not to exceed 50 percent of unobligated balances remaining
available at the end of fiscal year 2026, as recorded in the financial records at the time of
a reprogramming notification, but not later
than June 15, 2027, from appropriations for
‘‘Operations and Support’’ for fiscal year 2026
in this Act shall remain available through
September 30, 2027, in the account and for
the purposes for which the appropriations
were provided.
(b) Prior to the obligation of such funds, a
notification shall be submitted to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate in accordance with section 503 of this Act.
SEC. 506. (a) Funds made available by this
Act for intelligence activities are deemed to
be specifically authorized by the Congress
for purposes of section 504 of the National
Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 414) during fiscal year 2026 until the enactment of an Act
authorizing intelligence activities for fiscal
year 2026.
(b) Amounts described in subsection (a)
made available for ‘‘Intelligence, Analysis,
and Situational Awareness—Operations and
Support’’ that exceed the amounts in such
authorization for such account shall be
transferred to and merged with amounts
made available under the heading ‘‘Management Directorate—Operations and Support’’.
(c) Prior to the obligation of any funds
transferred under subsection (b), the Undersecretary for Management shall brief the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate on a plan
for the use of such funds.
SEC. 507. (a) The Secretary of Homeland
Security, or the designee of the Secretary,
shall notify the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate at least three full business days
in advance of—
(1) making or awarding a grant allocation
or grant in excess of $1,000,000 or a grant
made from the Disaster Relief Fund in excess
of $100,000;
(2) making or awarding a contract, other
transaction agreement, or task or delivery
order on a multiple award contract, or to
issue a letter of intent totaling in excess of
$2,000,000;
(3) awarding a task or delivery order requiring an obligation of funds in an amount
greater than $5,000,000 from multi-year Department of Homeland Security funds;
(4) making a sole-source grant award; or
(5) announcing publicly the intention to
make or award items under paragraph (1),
(2), (3), or (4) including a contract covered by
the Federal Acquisition Regulation.
(b) If the Secretary of Homeland Security
determines that compliance with this section would pose a substantial risk to human
life, health, or safety, an award may be made
without notification, and the Secretary shall
notify the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate
not later than three full business days after
such an award is made or letter issued.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

(c) A notification under this section—
(1) may not involve funds that are not
available for obligation; and
(2) shall include the amount of the award;
the fiscal year for which the funds for the
award were appropriated; the type of contract; and the account from which the funds
are being drawn.
SEC. 508. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no agency shall purchase, construct, or lease any additional facilities, except within or contiguous to existing locations, to be used for the purpose of conducting Federal law enforcement training
without advance notification to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate, except that the
Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers
is authorized to obtain the temporary use of
additional facilities by lease, contract, or
other agreement for training that cannot be
accommodated in existing Centers’ facilities.
SEC. 509. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available by this Act may be
used for expenses for any construction, repair, alteration, or acquisition project for
which a prospectus otherwise required under
chapter 33 of title 40, United States Code, has
not been approved, except that necessary
funds may be expended for each project for
required expenses for the development of a
proposed prospectus.
SEC. 510. Sections 522 and 530 of the Department of Homeland Security Appropriations
Act, 2008 (division E of Public Law 110–161;
121 Stat. 2073 and 2074) shall apply with respect to funds made available in this Act in
the same manner as such sections applied to
funds made available in that Act.
SEC. 511. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used in contravention of the applicable provisions of the Buy
American Act.
(b) For purposes of subsection (a), the term
‘‘Buy American Act’’ means chapter 83 of
title 41, United States Code.
SEC. 512. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used to amend the oath of
allegiance required by section 337 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C.
1448).
SEC. 513. (a) None of the funds provided or
otherwise made available by this Act may be
made available to carry out section 872 of
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C.
452) unless explicitly authorized by the Congress after the date of enactment of this Act.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply to the
use of the authorities provided by such section 872—
(1) to allocate or reallocate the functions
of the Assistant Secretary for the Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office to
other offices and organizational units within
the Department consistent with the ‘‘Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction’’ table
in the explanatory statement described in
section 4 (in the matter preceding division A
of this consolidated Act); or
(2) to allocate or reallocate any other functions of the Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office to other offices and organizational units within the Department consistent with the ‘‘Countering Weapons of
Mass Destruction’’ table in the explanatory
statement described in section 4 (in the matter preceding division A of this consolidated
Act).
(c) Notwithstanding subsection (a), the
Secretary may transfer funds made available
in prior appropriations Acts to the Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office
between any appropriations available to the
Department as necessary to carry out the
purposes described in subsection (b).
SEC. 514. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used for planning, testing, piloting, or developing a national identification card.

PO 00000

Frm 00134

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SEC. 515. Any official that is required by
this Act to report or to certify to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate may not delegate such authority to perform that act unless specifically authorized herein.
SEC. 516. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used for first-class travel
by the employees of agencies funded by this
Act in contravention of sections 301–10.122
through 301–10.124 of title 41, Code of Federal
Regulations.
SEC. 517. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used to employ workers
described in section 274A(h)(3) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C.
1324a(h)(3)).
SEC. 518. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, none of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this
Act may be used to pay award or incentive
fees for contractor performance that has
been judged to be below satisfactory performance or performance that does not meet
the basic requirements of a contract.
SEC. 519. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used to maintain or
establish a computer network unless such
network blocks the viewing, downloading,
and exchanging of pornography.
(b) Nothing in subsection (a) shall limit
the use of funds necessary for any Federal,
State, tribal, territorial, or local law enforcement agency or any other entity carrying out criminal investigations, prosecution, or adjudication activities.
SEC. 520. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used by a Federal law enforcement officer to facilitate the transfer of
an operable firearm to an individual if the
Federal law enforcement officer knows or
suspects that the individual is an agent of a
drug cartel unless law enforcement personnel
of the United States continuously monitor
or control the firearm at all times.
SEC. 521. (a) None of the funds made available in this Act may be used to pay for the
travel to or attendance of more than 50 employees of a single component of the Department of Homeland Security, who are stationed in the United States, at a single international conference unless the Secretary of
Homeland Security, or a designee, determines that such attendance is in the national interest and notifies the Committees
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate within at least 10 days
of that determination and the basis for that
determination.
(b) For purposes of this section the term
‘‘international conference’’ shall mean a
conference occurring outside of the United
States attended by representatives of the
United States Government and of foreign
governments, international organizations, or
nongovernmental organizations.
(c) The total cost to the Department of
Homeland Security of any such conference
shall not exceed $500,000.
(d) Employees who attend a conference virtually without travel away from their permanent duty station within the United
States shall not be counted for purposes of
this section, and the prohibition contained
in this section shall not apply to payments
for the costs of attendance for such employees.
SEC. 522. None of the funds made available
in this Act may be used to reimburse any
Federal department or agency for its participation in a National Special Security Event.
SEC. 523. (a) None of the funds made available to the Department of Homeland Security by this or any other Act may be obligated for the implementation of any structural pay reform or the introduction of any
new position classification that will affect
more than 100 full-time positions or costs

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.012

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

more than $5,000,000 in a single year before
the end of the 30-day period beginning on the
date on which the Secretary of Homeland Security submits to Congress a notification
that includes—
(1) the number of full-time positions affected by such change;
(2) funding required for such change for the
current fiscal year and through the Future
Years Homeland Security Program;
(3) justification for such change; and
(4) for a structural pay reform, an analysis
of compensation alternatives to such change
that were considered by the Department.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply to such
change if—
(1) it was proposed in the President’s budget proposal for the fiscal year funded by this
Act; and
(2) funds for such change have not been explicitly denied or restricted in this Act.
SEC. 524. (a) Any agency receiving funds
made available in this Act shall, subject to
subsections (b) and (c), post on the public
website of that agency any report required
to be submitted by the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate in this Act, upon the determination by the head of the agency that it
shall serve the national interest.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply to a report if—
(1) the public posting of the report compromises homeland or national security; or
(2) the report contains proprietary information.
(c) The head of the agency posting such report shall do so only after such report has
been made available to the Committees on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate for not less than 45 days
except as otherwise specified in law.
(d) If the requirements of this section are
not met, the reprogramming and transfer authority provided in section 503 of this Act
shall be suspended until the requirements of
subsection (a) are met.
SEC. 525. (a) Funding provided in this Act
for ‘‘Operations and Support’’ may be used
for minor procurement, construction, and
improvements.
(b) For purposes of subsection (a), ‘‘minor’’
refers to end items with a unit cost of
$250,000 or less for personal property, and
$4,000,000 or less for real property.
SEC. 526. The authority provided by section
532 of the Department of Homeland Security
Appropriations Act, 2018 (Public Law 115–141)
regarding primary and secondary schooling
of dependents shall continue in effect during
fiscal year 2026.
SEC. 527. (a) Except as provided in subsection (b), none of the funds made available
in this Act may be used to place restraints
on a woman in the custody of the Department of Homeland Security (including during transport, in a detention facility, or at
an outside medical facility) who is pregnant
or in post-delivery recuperation.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to a pregnant woman if—
(1) an appropriate official of the Department of Homeland Security makes an individualized determination that the woman—
(A) is a serious flight risk, and such risk
cannot be prevented by other means; or
(B) poses an immediate and serious threat
to harm herself or others that cannot be prevented by other means; or
(2) a medical professional responsible for
the care of the pregnant woman determines
that the use of therapeutic restraints is appropriate for the medical safety of the
woman.
(c) If a pregnant woman is restrained pursuant to subsection (b), only the safest and
least restrictive restraints, as determined by
the appropriate medical professional treat-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1309

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

ing the woman, may be used. In no case may
restraints be used on a woman who is in active labor or delivery, and in no case may a
pregnant woman be restrained in a face-down
position with four-point restraints, on her
back, or in a restraint belt that constricts
the area of the pregnancy. A pregnant
woman who is immobilized by restraints
shall be positioned, to the maximum extent
feasible, on her left side.
SEC. 528. (a) None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to destroy any
document, recording, or other record pertaining to any—
(1) death of;
(2) potential sexual assault or abuse perpetrated against; or
(3) allegation of abuse, criminal activity,
or disruption committed by an individual
held in the custody of the Department of
Homeland Security.
(b) The records referred to in subsection (a)
shall be made available, in accordance with
applicable laws and regulations, and Federal
rules governing disclosure in litigation, to
an individual who has been charged with a
crime, been placed into segregation, or otherwise punished as a result of an allegation
described in paragraph (3), upon the request
of such individual.
SEC. 529. Section 519 of division F of Public
Law 114–113, regarding a prohibition on funding for any position designated as a Principal Federal Official, shall apply with respect to any Federal funds in the same manner as such section applied to funds made
available in that Act.
SEC. 530. (a) Not later than 10 days after
the date on which the budget of the President for a fiscal year is submitted to Congress pursuant to section 1105(a) of title 31,
United States Code, the Under Secretary for
Management of Homeland Security shall
submit to the Committees on Appropriations
of the House of Representatives and the Senate a report on the unfunded priorities, for
the Department of Homeland Security and
separately for each departmental component, for which discretionary funding would
be classified as budget function 050.
(b) Each report under this section shall
specify, for each such unfunded priority—
(1) a summary description, including the
objectives to be achieved if such priority is
funded (whether in whole or in part);
(2) the description, including the objectives
to be achieved if such priority is funded
(whether in whole or in part);
(3) account information, including the following (as applicable):
(A) appropriation account; and
(B) program, project, or activity name; and
(4) the additional number of full-time or
part-time positions to be funded as part of
such priority.
(c) In this section, the term ‘‘unfunded priority’’, in the case of a fiscal year, means a
requirement that—
(1) is not funded in the budget referred to
in subsection (a);
(2) is necessary to fulfill a requirement associated with an operational or contingency
plan for the Department; and
(3) would have been recommended for funding through the budget referred to in subsection (a) if—
(A) additional resources had been available
for the budget to fund the requirement;
(B) the requirement has emerged since the
budget was formulated; or
(C) the requirement is necessary to sustain
prior-year investments.
SEC. 531. (a) Not later than 10 days after a
determination is made by the President to
evaluate and initiate protection under any
authority for a former or retired Government official or employee, or for an individual who, during the duration of the di-

PO 00000

Frm 00135

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

rected protection, will become a former or
retired Government official or employee (referred to in this section as a ‘‘covered individual’’), the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit a notification to congressional leadership and the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate, the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and
the Senate, the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives, the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate, and the
Committee on Oversight and Reform of the
House of Representatives (referred to in this
section as the ‘‘appropriate congressional
committees’’).
(b) Such notification may be submitted in
classified form, if necessary, and in consultation with the Director of National Intelligence or the Director of the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, as appropriate, and shall include the threat assessment, scope of the
protection, and the anticipated cost and duration of such protection.
(c) Not later than 15 days before extending,
or 30 days before terminating, protection for
a covered individual, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit a notification regarding the extension or termination and
any change to the threat assessment to the
congressional leadership and the appropriate
congressional committees.
(d) Not later than 45 days after the date of
enactment of this Act, and quarterly thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report to
the congressional leadership and the appropriate congressional committees, which may
be submitted in classified form, if necessary,
detailing each covered individual, and the
scope and associated cost of protection.
SEC. 532. (a) None of the funds provided to
the Department of Homeland Security in
this or any prior Act may be used by an
agency to submit an initial project proposal
to the Technology Modernization Fund (as
authorized by section 1078 of subtitle G of
title X of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (Public Law
115–91)) unless, concurrent with the submission of an initial project proposal to the
Technology Modernization Board, the head
of the agency—
(1) notifies the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate of the proposed submission of the
project proposal;
(2) submits to the Committees on Appropriations a copy of the project proposal; and
(3) provides a detailed analysis of how the
proposed project funding would supplement
or supplant funding requested as part of the
Department’s most recent budget submission.
(b) None of the funds provided to the Department of Homeland Security by the Technology Modernization Fund shall be available for obligation until 15 days after a report on such funds has been transmitted to
the Committees on Appropriations of the
House of Representatives and the Senate.
(c) The report described in subsection (b)
shall include—
(1) the full project proposal submitted to
and approved by the Fund’s Technology Modernization Board;
(2) the finalized interagency agreement between the Department and the Fund including the project’s deliverables and repayment
terms, as applicable;
(3) a detailed analysis of how the project
will supplement or supplant existing funding
available to the Department for similar activities;
(4) a plan for how the Department will
repay the Fund, including specific planned
funding sources, as applicable; and
(5) other information as determined by the
Secretary.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.012

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1310

SEC. 533. Within 60 days of any budget submission for the Department of Homeland Security for fiscal year 2027 that assumes revenues or proposes a reduction from the previous year based on user fees proposals that
have not been enacted into law prior to the
submission of the budget, the Secretary of
Homeland Security shall provide the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate specific reductions in proposed discretionary budget
authority commensurate with the revenues
assumed in such proposals in the event that
they are not enacted prior to October 1, 2026.
SEC. 534. None of the funds made available
by this Act may be obligated or expended to
implement the Arms Trade Treaty until the
Senate approves a resolution of ratification
for the Treaty.
SEC. 535. No Federal funds made available
to the Department of Homeland Security
may be used to enter into a procurement
contract, memorandum of understanding, or
cooperative agreement with, or make a grant
to, or provide a loan or guarantee to, any entity identified under section 1260H of the
William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021
(Public Law 116–283) or any subsidiary of
such entity.
SEC. 536. None of the funds appropriated or
otherwise made available in this or any
other Act may be used to transfer, release,
or assist in the transfer or release to or within the United States, its territories, or possessions Khalid Sheikh Mohammed or any
other detainee who—
(1) is not a United States citizen or a member of the Armed Forces of the United
States; and
(2) is or was held on or after June 24, 2009,
at the United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, by the Department of Defense.
SEC. 537. (a) The Secretary of Homeland
Security shall, on a monthly basis beginning
immediately after the date of enactment of
this Act, develop estimates of the number of
migrants anticipated to arrive at the southwest border of the United States.
(b) The Secretary shall ensure that, at a
minimum, the estimates developed pursuant
to subsection (a)—
(1) cover the current fiscal year and the
following fiscal year;
(2) include a breakout by demographic, to
include single adults, family units, and unaccompanied children;
(3) undergo an independent validation and
verification review;
(4) are used to inform policy planning and
budgeting processes within the Department
of Homeland Security; and
(5) are included in the budget materials
submitted to Congress for each fiscal year
beginning after the date of enactment of this
Act and in support of—
(A) the President’s annual budget request
pursuant to section 1105 of title 31, United
States Code;
(B) any supplemental funding request submitted to Congress;
(C) any reprogramming and transfer notification pursuant to section 503 of this Act;
and
(D) such budget materials shall include—
(i) the most recent monthly estimates developed pursuant to subsection (a);
(ii) a description and quantification of the
estimates used to justify funding requests
for Department programs related to border
security, immigration enforcement, and immigration services;
(iii) a description and quantification of the
anticipated workload and requirements resulting from such estimates; and
(iv) a confirmation as to whether the budget requests for impacted agencies were developed using the same estimates.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

(c) The Secretary shall share the monthly
estimates developed pursuant to subsection
(a) with the Secretary of Health and Human
Services, the Attorney General, the Secretary of State, and the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate.
(d) If the monthly estimates described in
subsection (b) are not provided for the purposes described, the reprogramming and
transfer authority provided in section 503 of
this Act shall be suspended until such time
as the required estimates are provided to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate.
SEC. 538. (a) The Secretary of Homeland
Security shall, on a monthly basis beginning
immediately after the date of enactment of
this Act, develop estimates of the number of
individuals anticipated to be detained in and
removed from the United States.
(b) The Secretary shall ensure that, at a
minimum, the estimates developed pursuant
to subsection (a)—
(1) cover the current fiscal year and the
following fiscal year;
(2) include a breakout by demographics, to
include single adults and family units;
(3) undergo an independent validation and
verification review;
(4) are used to inform policy planning and
budgeting processes within the Department
of Homeland Security; and
(5) are included in the budget materials
submitted to Congress for each fiscal year
beginning after the date of enactment of this
Act and in support of—
(A) the President’s annual budget request
pursuant to section 1105 of title 31, United
States Code;
(B) any supplemental funding request submitted to Congress;
(C) any reprogramming and transfer notification pursuant to section 503 of this Act;
and
(D) such budget materials shall include—
(i) the most recent monthly estimates developed pursuant to subsection (a);
(ii) a description and quantification of the
estimates used to justify funding requests
for Department programs related to border
security, immigration enforcement, and immigration services;
(iii) a description and quantification of the
anticipated workload and requirements resulting from such estimates; and
(iv) a confirmation as to whether the budget requests for impacted agencies were developed using the same estimates.
(c) The Secretary shall share the monthly
estimates developed pursuant to subsection
(a) with the Attorney General, the Secretary
of State, and the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and
the Senate.
(d) If the monthly estimates described in
subsection (b) are not provided for the purposes described, the reprogramming and
transfer authority provided in section 503 of
this Act shall be suspended until such time
as the required estimates are provided to the
Committees on Appropriations of the House
of Representatives and the Senate.
SEC. 539. (a) Prior to the Secretary of
Homeland Security requesting assistance
from the Department of Defense for border
security operations, the Secretary shall ensure that an alternatives analysis and costbenefit analysis is conducted before such request is made, which shall include an examination of obtaining such support through
other means.
(b) Not later than 30 days after the date on
which a request for assistance is made, the
Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations of
the House of Representatives and the Senate
a report detailing the types of support re-

PO 00000

Frm 00136

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

quested, the alternatives analysis and costbenefit analysis described in subsection (a),
and the operational impact to Department of
Homeland Security operations of any Department of Defense border security support
requested by the Secretary.
(c) Not later than 30 days after the date on
which a request made for assistance is granted and quarterly thereafter through the duration of such assistance, the Secretary of
Homeland Security shall submit to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives and the Senate, a report detailing the assistance provided and the operational impacts to border security operations.
SEC. 540. Funds made available in this Act
or any other Act for Operations and Support
may be used for the necessary expenses of
providing an employee emergency back-up
care program.
SEC. 541. (a) Not less than $5,000,000 made
available in this Act shall be transferred to
‘‘U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement—Operations and Support’’ to support
and conduct necessary operations of the Blue
Campaign for fiscal year 2026.
(b) Prior to the obligation of funds made
available by subsection (a), notification shall
be submitted to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives
and the Senate.
SEC. 542. (a) If the reporting requirement
set forth in paragraph (2) under the heading
‘‘Federal Emergency Management Agency—
Disaster Relief Fund’’ in the Department of
Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2015
(Public Law 114–4), as applied in this fiscal
year by section 306 of this Act, is not submitted to the Committees on Appropriations
of the House of Representatives and the Senate and published on the Agency’s website
not later than the fifth business day of the
applicable month, the amount made available for ‘‘Office of the Secretary and Executive Management—Operations and Support—
Management and Oversight’’ shall be reduced
by $100,000 for each day such report is not
submitted and published on the Agency’s
website.
(b) During any period in which the total
number of requests for reimbursement for a
covered expense for individual assistance or
public assistance related to emergency (42
U.S.C. 5122(1)) or major disaster (42 U.S.C.
5122(2)) declarations under the Robert T.
Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5121 et seq.) that the
Department of Homeland Security has been
considering under final review for greater
than 60 days exceeds 500, the amount made
available for ‘‘Office of the Secretary and
Executive
Management—Operations
and
Support—Management and Oversight’’ shall
be reduced by $100,000 for each day during
such period on which the cumulative total of
requests over 60 days in final review exceeds
500.
(c) Subsection (b) shall not apply if the balance of funding for the Disaster Relief Fund
is sufficient only for the purpose of obligating funds for activities determined to be
lifesaving or life-sustaining.
SEC. 543. Section 16005(c) of title VI of division B of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security Act (Public Law 116–136)
shall be applied as if the language read as
follows: ‘‘Subsection (a) shall apply until
September 30, 2026.’’.
SEC. 544. The levels for appropriations accounts specified for classified programs in
this Act shall conform to the direction included in the classified annex accompanying
this Act and shall be implemented in a manner consistent with section 545.
SEC. 545. Upon a determination by the Director of National Intelligence that such action is necessary and in the national interest, the Director may, with the approval of

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.012

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

the Secretary of Homeland Security and the
Director of the Office of Management and
Budget, transfer amounts for the National
Intelligence Program consistent with the
percentage caps specified in section 503(c):
Provided, That such authority to transfer
may not be used unless for higher priority
items, based on unforeseen intelligence requirements, than those for which originally
appropriated and in no case where the item
for which funds are requested has been denied by the Congress: Provided further, That
a request for any transfer of funds using authority provided in this section shall be
made consistent with the requirements of
section 503(d)(1).
SEC. 546. Within seven days of the date of
enactment of this Act, and quarterly thereafter, the Department shall submit to the
Committees on Appropriation of the House
of Representatives and the Senate—
(1) an obligation plan by program, project,
or activity for each component receiving
funds from Public Law 119–21;
(2) estimated fee collections for each component collecting new or enhanced fees authorized by Public Law 119–21, delineated by
collections that a component will retain and
collections that a component will remit to
other agencies or the Treasury; and
(3) an obligation plan by program, project,
or activity for fee collections identified in
paragraph (2) as being retained by a component within the Department.
SEC. 547. (a) None of the funds appropriated
or otherwise made available to the Department of Homeland Security by this Act may
be used to prevent any of the following persons from entering, for the purpose of conducting oversight, any facility operated by
or for the Department of Homeland Security
used to detain or otherwise house aliens, or
to make any temporary modification at any
such facility that in any way alters what is
observed by a visiting Member of Congress or
such designated employee, compared to what
would be observed in the absence of such
modification:
(1) A Member of Congress.
(2) An employee of the United States House
of Representatives or the United States Senate designated by such a Member for the purposes of this section.
(b) Nothing in this section may be construed to require a Member of Congress to
provide prior notice of the intent to enter a
facility described in subsection (a) for the
purpose of conducting oversight.
(c) With respect to individuals described in
subsection (a)(2), the Department of Homeland Security may require that a request be
made at least 24 hours in advance of an intent to enter a facility described in subsection (a).
SEC. 548. In addition to amounts otherwise
made available for such purposes, there is
appropriated $30,000,000, for an additional
amount for ‘‘The Judiciary—Supreme Court
of the United States—Salaries and Expenses’’, to remain available until September 30, 2028: Provided, That amounts
made available pursuant to this section shall
be subject to the same authorities and conditions as if such amounts were provided under
the heading ‘‘The Judiciary—Supreme Court
of the United States—Salaries and Expenses’’ in the Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act, 2026.
SEC. 549. There is appropriated $140,000,000
for an additional amount for ‘‘Department of
Transportation-Federal Aviation Administration-Operations’’ for air traffic organization activities, to remain available until
September 30, 2027: Provided, That the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall only use such amounts to provide a rate of pay increase for calendar year
2026 of 3.8 percent, for air traffic controllers,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1311

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

as defined by section 2109(1)(A) of title 5,
United States Code, and air traffic controller
supervisors or managers who are not covered
under such section, but who manage air traffic: Provided further, That such adjustment
shall be implemented for all such employees
only to the extent the Administrator determines, in his sole discretion, that improvements in workforce scheduling, staffing utilization, or other operational efficiencies are
achieved that contribute to addressing workforce shortfalls and enhancing aviation safety: Provided further, That if the Administrator makes such determination, then such
adjustment shall be effective the first pay
period beginning after January 1, 2026: Provided further, That amounts provided by this
section shall be subject to the same authorities and conditions as if such amounts were
provided by the Department of Transportation Appropriations Act, 2026.
SEC. 550. (a) Of the total amount provided
under the heading ‘‘Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency—Operations and
Support’’, $99,750,000 shall be derived by
transfer from the unobligated balances of
amounts previously appropriated under the
heading ‘‘Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency—Cybersecurity Response
and Recovery Fund’’ in division J of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58).
(b) Amounts derived by transfer pursuant
to this section shall continue to be treated
as amounts specified in section 103(b) of division A of Public Law 118–5.
(RESCISSIONS OF FUNDS)

SEC. 551. Of the funds appropriated to the
Department of Homeland Security, the following funds are hereby rescinded from the
following accounts and programs in the specified amounts: Provided, That no amounts
may be rescinded from amounts that were
designated by the Congress as an emergency
requirement pursuant to a concurrent resolution on the budget or the Balanced Budget
and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985:
(1) $73,327,000 from the unobligated balances available in the ‘‘Management Directorate—Procurement, Construction, and Improvements’’ account (70 22/26 0406).
(2) $6,713,000 from the unobligated balances
available in the ‘‘U.S. Customs and Border
Protection—Operations and Support’’ account (70 X 0530).
(3) $387,000 from the unobligated balances
available in the ‘‘U.S. Customs and Border
Protection—Automation Modernization’’ account (70 X 0531).
(4) $917,000 from the unobligated balances
available in the ‘‘U.S. Customs and Border
Protection—Procurement, Construction, and
Improvements’’ account (70 X 0532).
(5) $6,336,000 from the unobligated balances
available in the ‘‘U.S. Customs and Border
Protection—Border Security Fencing, Infrastructure, and Technology’’ account (70 X
0533).
(6) $1,413,000 from the unobligated balances
available in the ‘‘U.S. Customs and Border
Protection—Air and Marine Interdiction, Operations, Maintenance, and Procurement’’
account (70 X 0544).
(7) $172,000 from the unobligated balances
available in the ‘‘Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency—Infrastructure
Protection and Infrastructure Security’’ account (70 X 0565).
SEC. 552. The following unobligated balances made available to the Department of
Homeland Security pursuant to section 505
of the Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2024 (Public Law 118–47), as
incorporated by section 1101 of the Full-Year
Continuing Appropriations Act, 2025 (Public
Law 119–4), are rescinded:

PO 00000

Frm 00137

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

(1) $2,072,147 from ‘‘Office of the Secretary
and Executive Management—Operations and
Support’’.
(2) $5,487,177 from ‘‘Management Directorate—Operations and Support’’.
(3) $4,493,650 from ‘‘Intelligence, Analysis,
and Situational Awareness—Operations and
Support’’.
(4) $88,190 from ‘‘Office of the Inspector
General—Operations and Support’’.
(5) $1,139,096 from ‘‘U.S. Customs and Border Protection—Operations and Support’’.
(6) $19,650,000 from ‘‘Transportation Security Administration—Operations and Support’’.
(7) $703,390 from ‘‘United States Secret
Service—Operations and Support’’.
(8) $52,349,050 from ‘‘Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency—Operations
and Support’’.
(9) $18,525,975 from ‘‘Federal Emergency
Management Agency—Operations and Support’’.
(10) $120,860 from ‘‘U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services—Operations and Support’’.
(11) $178,340 from ‘‘Science and Technology
Directorate—Operations and Support’’.
(12) $6,937,020 from ‘‘Countering Weapons of
Mass Destruction Office—Operations and
Support’’.
SEC. 553. Of the unobligated balances in the
‘‘Department of Homeland Security Nonrecurring Expenses Fund’’ established in section 538 of division F of Public Law 117–103,
$2,362,000 are hereby rescinded.
This division may be cited as the ‘‘Department of Homeland Security Appropriations
Act, 2026’’.
SEC. 554. REPEAL OF SENATE NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO
LEGAL PROCESS ON DISCLOSURES OF
SENATE DATA.
Section 213 of title II of division C of the
Continuing
Appropriations,
Agriculture,
Legislative Branch, Military Construction
and Veterans Affairs, and Extensions Act,
2026, and the amendments made by such section, are hereby repealed and shall have no
force or effect.’ ’’

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The bill,
as amended, shall be debatable for 1
hour, equally divided and controlled by
the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Appropriations, or their respective designees.
The gentleman from Oklahoma (Mr.
COLE) and the gentlewoman from Connecticut (Ms. DELAURO) each will control 30 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Oklahoma.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may
have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material on the measure under
consideration.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Oklahoma?
There was no objection.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of H.R.
7147, the Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act.
This bill marks the final measure of
our FY26 agenda. Our work here is
about one of the most important duties, which is keeping the American
people and our homeland safe.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.012

H22JAPT1

H1312

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

This legislation delivers just that
and upholds the America First agenda
through supporting border patrol enforcement agents, detention and deportation efforts, cutting-edge technology
to detect illicit activity, and Coast
Guard investments to counter Communist China’s aggression in the maritime sphere.
We enhance resources to combat
fentanyl and other deadly drugs, while
safeguarding children through expanded investigation into human trafficking and forced labor.
From our borders and ports to aviation and cyberspace, this legislation
delivers the personnel, training, and
technology needed to reinforce our defenses and confront those who wish us
harm.
It also prioritizes strong and resilient
communities by bolstering disaster
preparedness, response, and recovery
efforts. Subcommittee Chairman MARK
AMODEI prioritized safety at every
level. Even in the face of political challenge, he and the ranking member, Mr.
CUELLAR of Texas, worked together to
produce a serious and responsible bill.
H.R. 7147 is focused on outcomes, not
partisan rhetoric. It equips frontline
personnel, strengthens enforcement,
and provides the certainty DHS needs
to carry out its mission effectively.
I thank our Members and staff for
their work, and I urge support for this
bipartisan legislation.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
b 1330
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself 4 minutes.
Mr. Speaker, I begin by thanking
Ranking Member CUELLAR for his work
on this bill. He is a tough negotiator,
and this bill is better for his efforts.
I also thank the committee staff. In
particular, Shannon McCully, Jamie
Wise, and Jim Ellsworth. They spent
many long hours and a lot of sleepless
nights fighting to make this bill as
good as it could be.
The Homeland Security funding bill
before us today has gotten a lot of attention over the past few days, and
rightfully so. It deals with funding ICE,
an agency that has shown itself to be
lawless, vindictive, aggressive, cruel,
and, thus far, unaccountable both to
Congress and the American people.
That is not all that the Homeland Security bill deals with, however. Before
I return to the topic of ICE and its
funding, I will share some of what else
is contained in this bill.
This bill rejects President Trump and
Secretary Noem’s attempts to eliminate FEMA, increasing funding for the
agency by over $870 million, in addition
to providing more than $26 billion for
the Disaster Relief Fund. It increases
funding for TSA by $149 million and
provides a pay raise for air traffic controllers and uniformed members of the
United States Coast Guard.
This is important funding, and I am
glad that these provisions which we

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

fought for were included in the bill.
The final product, though far from perfect, is better because of it.
Despite these inclusions and others,
it is impossible to ignore the impact
that ICE’s conduct had on completing
this bill. ICE has operated with brutality, terrorizing our constituents, abducting our neighbors, and violently
assaulting lawful residents who have
done nothing but had the misfortune of
crossing ICE’s path on their way home
from work.
Unfortunately, this month, we saw
how this unchecked lawlessness can
have fatal consequences with the killing of Renee Nicole Good.
This is a rogue agency. Substantial
constraints must be placed on it. During negotiations, we proposed such constraints, but our Republican colleagues
refused to include almost all of them.
We sought to prevent any funds from
being used to detain or deport U.S. citizens, a commonsense measure. They refused to commit to that.
We proposed prohibiting interior enforcement by non-ICE personnel, like
the Border Patrol. That was rejected,
as well.
We put forward a provision to ensure
that Members of Congress can continue
to conduct our lawful oversight of all
ICE facilities, uninhibited. That, too,
was deemed unacceptable.
Democrats did win some battles in
this bill, however. Under this bill, we
reduce ICE’s Enforcement and Removal
Operations budget by $115 million. We
reduce their detention capacity, providing funding that could only be used
for body-worn cameras. We increase
funding for the Office of Inspector General, specifically for oversight of ICE
detention facilities.
These are good provisions. I am glad
they are in this bill, but it is clear that
more must be done. ICE believes it can
act with impunity, and it is behaving
accordingly.
I trust that my colleagues have
taken the time to review what is contained in this bill and have determined
for themselves what is best for their
constituents and communities. I have
made my own determination, and that
determination leads me to a ‘‘no’’ vote
on this bill.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 6
minutes to the gentleman from Nevada
(Mr. AMODEI), my very good friend and
distinguished chairman of the Subcommittee on Homeland Security of
the Appropriations Committee.
Mr. AMODEI of Nevada. Mr. Speaker,
I rise today in strong support of the
Homeland Security bill under consideration.
As the chairman of the Homeland Security Subcommittee, I thank the full
committee chair, Mr. COLE, my colleague from Oklahoma, for his leadership in helping to return us to regular
order and producing a series of bills
that will fully fund the government by
the January 30 deadline.

PO 00000

Frm 00138

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

I also thank my colleague from Connecticut, the ranking member, ROSA
DELAURO, who was part of this combination. We have seen them work before in years past, both as the chairman of the full committee and as folks
on other subcommittees that have
worked well. It has been a help to all of
us, and I thank them all publicly for
their professionalism and respect for
each other in our process.
I also thank my good friend, subcommittee Ranking Member CUELLAR,
a real pro. We don’t agree all the time,
but it is like it has never been a disagreeable experience. There are days
around this outfit when, quite frankly,
that isn’t the case. I thank my friend.
I appreciate that. He has been a great
partner.
Finally, I will take the time to thank
the committee staff on both sides of
the aisle who worked tirelessly over
the past month to negotiate the product before us. On the majority side are
Paul Anstine, Anna Lanier Fischer,
Fern Gibbons, Alessandra Ramirez,
Ashley Truluck, and Nkosi Thomas. On
the
minority
side
are
Shannon
McCully, Jamie Wise, and Jim Ellsworth.
It was not cool to be on Appropriations during the last 30 days, for sure,
and they were real troupers, professionals, and class acts. I thank them
all for their dedication and effort.
I also remind everybody, because we
get tied up in a lot of stuff, that, essentially, the Homeland Security bill is
the Coast Guard, FEMA, TSA, Secret
Service, Border Patrol, and ICE. There
are other parts in there, but that is the
majority of what we are talking about.
Homeland, what is that? That is the
agencies that take up the lion’s share
of this sort of stuff.
As the chairmen, we would like to
basically think that by having those
meetings, talking across the aisle and
with our staffs, that what we have produced is a bedrock model for going forward and getting us out of the continuing resolution rut. Continuing resolutions lock us into spending levels
that are both outdated and have not
evolved like, frankly, the positions on
both sides.
The fiscal year 2026 Homeland Security bill under consideration today furthers this administration’s goals of
undoing the damage caused by the previous administration, starting with the
border. This funds the President’s priorities, codifies reductions and efficiencies, and operationalizes border security and immigration enforcement
investments in the reconciliation process.
Mr. Speaker, let’s start with ICE. I
know people have lamented that, boy,
we really didn’t get everything we
wanted and all that stuff. It is like,
guess what. There is something that we
should both be celebrating here today,
and it is about ICE.
Since the last administration wasn’t
real big on ICE, kind of maybe hoped
they didn’t exist or whatever, one of

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.050

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

the things that didn’t happen with respect to ICE, like all other law enforcement agencies around, was the use and
implementation of body cameras so
that we don’t have to rely on somebody
who happened to have their cell phone
and have a good angle, whether they
are accusing or defending themselves
for whatever they did. This bill funds
body cameras for ICE personnel so that
we can have first-person, if you will,
access to what people really think was
done.
Would you like a pay raise for the
Coast Guard? This bill does that.
Would you like more infrastructure
for the Coast Guard? This bill does
that.
Would you like grants for first responders and nonprofit religious worship institutions? This bill does that.
The foundation is undeniable. As the
tax on houses of worship has increased
over the last few years, we are providing more money for that.
Finally, we ensure that CISA, the
agency that is charged with protecting
our critical infrastructure, like power
and water, has the resources required
to prevent attacks from nation-state
adversaries like China and Russia.
Simply put, this bill ensures that the
men and women of the Department of
Homeland Security, who work tirelessly to keep America safe, have the
resources and tools that they need to
protect this great Nation.
I ask my colleagues to continue to
support the bill.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 4
minutes to the gentleman from Texas
(Mr. CUELLAR), the distinguished ranking member of the Homeland Security
Subcommittee.
b 1340
Mr. CUELLAR. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
support of this bill, but first, I want to
thank the chairmen of the subcommittees and the full committee and my
ranking member for their leadership.
Certainly, I also thank the staff on
both sides for the hard work that they
have provided on this difficult bill.
I represent 280 miles of the U.S.-Mexico border. Let me be the first to say
this bill is not perfect. However, this
bill is better than the alternatives of
either funding the Department under a
continuing resolution or shutting down
the government. That is the choice in
front of us.
This bill puts real requirements on
the Department. It provides oversight
and makes targeted investments that
directly help States and local communities to make sure that we help folks
like firefighters and other folks.
Let me say this: It is better than the
alternative, leaving the Department
with a blank check, virtually unchecked by the Committee on Appropriations and Congress.
Allowing DHS to operate under a
continuing resolution or trying to shut
it down, ICE would ensure that they
have no direction from Congress.
This bill flat-funds ICE, but at the
same time, we also strengthen the

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1313

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

oversight of ICE by increasing funding
to the inspector general by over $38
million over fiscal year 2025. That includes $20 million to do additional inspections of ICE facilities and $12.8
million to provide oversight of the Department for the funds that they got
under reconciliation.
It also provides, as the gentleman
said a few minutes ago, $20 million for
body-worn cameras, specifically for
CBP and ICE, which are conducting immigration enforcement. It also provides funding to increase training for
CBP and ICE agents for deescalation
tactics.
Let me say this: We did try to fight
more. Unfortunately, we couldn’t reach
an agreement with our Republican
friends, but we did not walk away from
the work of putting the oversight into
law that this bill provides.
We also provide funding accountability to the Office of Civil Rights and
Civil Liberties and the Office of Citizenship and Immigration Services,
which is, again, something that they
tried to close.
Let me be clear: ICE can operate
based on the funds that they were provided under reconciliation, but we cannot say the same thing to other departments or other agencies under DHS, especially when we talk about FEMA.
FEMA gets $5.7 billion, including $3.8
billion for Federal assistance, which is
a 20-percent increase above fiscal year
2025. Again, that money goes back to
help firefighters and disasters.
Again, it also provides money to
CISA. As you know, there were cuts,
but we are providing money there to
make sure that we fight the threats to
our critical infrastructure that we are
seeing across the country.
Finally, this provides funding in the
amount of a $550 million increase for
the Coast Guard because, again, we
have to make sure the Coast Guard
gets the funding, especially when it
comes to funding drug interdiction.
Again, I say this: Is this bill perfect?
No. However, a continuing resolution
provides no oversight, and ICE also
gets funding from the reconciliation.
Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is simple. This bill is better than the alternative.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Washington (Mr. NEWHOUSE), my very good
friend.
Mr. NEWHOUSE. Mr. Speaker, I
thank Chairman COLE for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, the fiscal year 2026
Homeland Security appropriations bill
is the culmination of the hard work of
our committee and our staff and provides critical investments to protect
the American homeland.
As a member of the Subcommittee on
Homeland Security, I know that this
bill champions public safety and preparedness. It protects taxpayer dollars
and refocuses the Department on its
core functions.
With border encounters at a historic
low, this legislation fully funds DHS

PO 00000

Frm 00139

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

and the effort to detain and remove
violent, illegal immigrants from our
communities.
In central Washington, we know
firsthand the important work done by
the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. This bill increases FEMA
grant programs by 5 percent above
their previous levels and restores critical staffing positions lost under the
fiscal year 2025 continuing resolution.
It also delivers funds directly to communities across the country, including
my own Yakima County, to establish a
dedicated emergency operation center
and ensure timely and well-coordinated
emergency response efforts.
The U.S. Coast Guard is fundamental
in protecting our border and domestic
security. This bill boosts funding for
the Coast Guard and provides funding
to counter China’s footprint in the
Indo-Pacific.
Lastly, as a member of the Select
Committee on the CCP, the Chinese
Communist Party, I am pleased to see
this bill refocuses the Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Agency, or CISA, on
its core cybersecurity mission and
rightsizes the agency to preserve critical functions. This includes funding to
counter threats from adversarial nations and ensure critical infrastructure
systems are protected from these
threats.
Mr. Speaker, this Homeland Security
bill is the last piece in completing 12
fiscally responsible, bipartisan spending bills. It is a testament to—
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from Washington.
Mr. NEWHOUSE. It is a testament to
the hard work of the committee and
subcommittee leadership on both sides
of the aisle and the dedicated staff that
spent an untold amount of time to
make this process work.
Mr. Speaker, I encourage all of my
colleagues on both sides to support this
negotiated bill that provides the resources necessary to secure our borders, protect Americans here at home,
and ensure we are being good stewards
of taxpayer dollars.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3
minutes to the gentlewoman from Massachusetts (Ms. CLARK), the distinguished Democratic whip.
Ms. CLARK of Massachusetts. Mr.
Speaker, today is not about ICE funding. Republicans already gave ICE $75
billion. Today is about the fact that we
have a masked paramilitary force terrorizing our communities.
Republicans had the opportunity in
this bill to enact commonsense checks
on ICE operations. They refused.
First, they refused to ensure ICE
abides by the same laws and procedures
as our local and State police: that they
are unmasked when on duty, that they
actually wear the body cameras, that
they wear a name plate identifying
who they are, and that they are held
responsible for excessive force.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.052

H22JAPT1

H1314

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Second, the GOP refused to join us in
upholding the Constitution. Not only
are these arrests warrantless, but ICE
has also now determined they have the
right to search your home without a
judicial warrant. That is illegal, and it
is unconstitutional.
Third, they refused to make sure
that the use of deadly force is always
thoroughly investigated. When Renee
Good was shot to death, Kristi Noem
declared her a domestic terrorist within hours. The only investigation Noem
was interested in was an investigation
into Renee Good’s widow. That is not
justice. That is not security for the
American people.
Fourth, Republicans refused to agree
to the simple concept that American
citizens should not be detained and deported. The people going about their
business should not be kidnapped because of the color of their skin or because they are engaging in peaceful
protests.
Finally, Republicans refused to
prioritize the very real work that DHS
does in our communities: stopping
fentanyl trafficking, stopping child
trafficking, and stopping cartels. DHS
is taking those investigators off those
cases and putting them on ICE raids. It
is at the expense of our national security.
When the GOP can’t even agree to
commonsense guardrails, it is clear
this isn’t about immigration. This isn’t
about security. This is about statesanctioned terror. This is about the political retribution of a vengeful President.
I will not rubberstamp the Federal
Government’s use of political violence
against its own people, and I am asking
every Member to join me in voting
‘‘no.’’
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Florida
(Mr. RUTHERFORD), my very good friend
and a former law enforcement official
and sheriff.
b 1350
Mr. RUTHERFORD. Mr. Speaker,
today I rise in support of the fiscal
year 2026 Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act and urge my
colleagues to do the same.
This bill champions public safety,
and it refocuses the Department of
Homeland Security back on its fundamental mission that was really lost
sight of during the Biden administration.
This legislation, Mr. Speaker, provides funding to important agencies to
defend the Nation against the threat
posed by terrorists, criminals, and foreign adversaries.
It aligns with President Trump’s
agenda to close our border and supports local, State, and Federal law enforcement officers that are deporting
dangerous criminal aliens out of our
communities.
Mr. Speaker, this bill gives TSA the
resources to keep the flying public safe
while getting rid of wasteful programs
like VIPR.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

It supports CISA, the Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency,
which is securing vital infrastructure
from adversaries like China.
It also provides FEMA with the resources it needs to support communities following disasters, and it invests in the Coast Guard, who is keeping fentanyl and other dangerous drugs
off our shores and out of our communities.
This bill, Mr. Speaker, puts America
first. It protects Americans and secures
our homeland, and I urge all my colleagues to vote ‘‘yes’’ on this bill.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from Minnesota (Ms. MCCOLLUM), the distinguished ranking member of the Defense
Subcommittee.
Ms. MCCOLLUM. Mr. Speaker, I rise
in strong opposition to this bill.
This year, Minnesota has witnessed a
state of unbelievable violence, which
has led to chaos and terror at the
hands of President Trump and DHS.
Minnesotans
are
being
racially
profiled on a mass scale, assaulted on
our streets, and kidnapped from our
communities. Just the other day, a 5year-old child was used as bait to get
members of his household to come out
so masked people in front of this 5year-old could handcuff and carry family members away.
Masked Federal agents are seizing
parents, yes, in front of terrified children, and many of these people we are
finding had no record and were here legally.
American citizens and permanent
residents are snatched from their cars,
and they are taken to detention centers. I worked on one case this past
weekend. It was cold, and a woman was
warming up her car. She was taken out
of her car. She was taken to Whipple.
Then she was taken to Sherburne
County and then back to Whipple
again. Oh, and in between, she had to
go to the hospital because of a head injury, and her arms, her wrists, might
be suffering permanent damage. This
was a citizen, a citizen, mind you.
This is the worst case of mass civil
rights violations by the Federal Government in recent history.
Mr. Speaker, 2 weeks ago, Minnesota
stood up to call out these illegal abuses
by masked Federal agents, and a citizen, a mother of three in Minneapolis,
Renee Good, was shot and killed.
It is happening right here, right now
in Minnesota in the United States of
America, and it needs to stop now. Not
one penny of our taxpayer dollars
should go to DHS while our constitutional rights are being violated.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield
an additional 30 seconds to the gentlewoman from Minnesota.
Ms. MCCOLLUM. Mr. Speaker, in my
last 30 seconds let me just say: Vote
no. Vote for our constitutional rights.
Vote for due process. Vote ‘‘no’’ on this
bill.

PO 00000

Frm 00140

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Missouri (Mr. ALFORD), my very good
friend and distinguished gentleman
who is also the vice-chair of the Military Construction, Veterans Affairs,
and Related Agencies Subcommittee of
the Appropriations Committee.
Mr. ALFORD. Mr. Speaker, this moment matters. For too long, we here in
Washington have governed by crisis.
We rushed preholiday omnibuses, backroom deals, and broken promises.
Mr. Speaker, those days are over.
Today, following President Trump’s
America First agenda, along with
Chairman TOM COLE’s unmatched leadership, we are doing what the American people sent us here to Washington,
D.C., to do: Put America first.
Mr. Speaker, 12 out of 12 appropriations bills will be passed today, including Homeland Security. These are
transparent bills, accountable bills,
and fiscally responsible bills.
This hasn’t happened in years, and it
sends a clear, powerful message back
home that the House is back at work.
We are back to governing.
These bills strengthen our military,
secure our border, invest in health and
workforce readiness, modernize transportation, and deliver real savings for
taxpayers.
It is peace through strength. This
Homeland bill makes us safer at home
by deporting illegal criminal aliens.
In the overall bills through our Member-directed investments, we are expanding Skyhaven Airport to improve
safety and grow aviation training at
the University of Central Missouri in
Warrensburg.
We are launching a workforce training center for ag in Sedalia to prepare
the next generation.
We are replacing a failing bridge so
first responders, schoolbuses, and commerce can move safely and reliably in
Oak Grove, Missouri.
These are reasonable Member-directed investments in America, our
true Article I authority.
Mr. Speaker, we are just inches away
from the finish line. Let’s not slow this
down. Let’s get over the finish line.
Let’s deliver now for what the American people sent us here to do: Donald
J. Trump’s America First agenda
backed by 12 appropriation bills passed
out of this House, signed by the President. Let’s fund our government.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from
Florida (Ms. LOIS FRANKEL), the distinguished ranking member of the National Security, Department of State,
and Related Programs Subcommittee.
Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida. Mr.
Speaker, I rise in strong opposition to
this Homeland Security funding bill.
We cannot continue to fund an agency that ignores the Constitution, abandons due process, interrupts businesses,
and traumatizes families.
Across the country, ICE enforcement
is no longer about public safety. It has
become a campaign of cruelty and fear.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.054

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

Families are being torn apart with no
warning and no plan. Children are
afraid to go to school. Homes are being
entered without warrants. Workers are
being dragged off of jobsites by their
hair. People are being abducted when
shopping for groceries, going to church,
or taking their kids to school. Peaceful
citizens are being pepper-sprayed and
shot in cold blood for daring to speak
up.
When Members of Congress try to
conduct oversight, we are blocked. We
are denied access. We are told to look
the other way.
This is not law enforcement.
This is not accountability.
That is not who we are as a country.
This bill writes a check for an agency
that is violating basic rights while refusing basic oversight. It pours money
into detention and enforcement without guardrails, without transportation,
and without respect for human dignity.
I want to be clear. Security does not
require cruelty. Enforcement does not
require lawlessness, and immigration
policy should never require us to abandon our values.
Yes, we need border security and an
orderly immigration system, but we
can secure our borders and uphold due
process and enforce the law and protect
families. This bill does neither, and
until the Trump administration ends
these abuses, restores transparency,
and respects the Constitution, I cannot
and will not support funding that enables this harm.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from
North Dakota (Mrs. FEDORCHAK), my
very good friend.
Mrs. FEDORCHAK. Mr. Speaker,
first I want to commend Chairman TOM
COLE for leading the appropriations
process as intended by our Founders.
Fiscal year ‘26 will mark the first
time in decades that Congress has
funded
the
Federal
Government
through all 12 appropriations bills
without reverting to a yearlong continuing resolution. As a freshman, I
committed to working this process to
this end during my time in Congress. I
never dreamed I would see it my first
year. I thank Mr. COLE for his leadership.
Now, I rise today on behalf of North
Dakota farmers and rural communities
to support the step included in this
measure to move forward on yearround E15.
Farmers are hurting. Across the
country, input costs and interest costs
are up. Our producers are also dealing
with tariff pressures and shifting markets, and at the same time, commodity
prices are down. That is a difficult
combination for anyone.
The future of many farm families
hangs in the balance both in my State
and many others throughout the heartland.
Year-round E15 offers immediate relief without costing the Federal Government anything. This is a top priority for farmers in my State and

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1315

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

across our Nation. E15 provides an immediate, strong, domestic market for
their bountiful harvest.
b 1400
E15 is homegrown energy. Year-round
E15 eliminates regulatory uncertainty
that prevents the industry from flourishing. It will add $25.3 billion to the
U.S. GDP and support more than
128,000 full-time jobs. President Trump
and Secretary Rollins support this effort. Rural America is counting on us
to deliver.
Mr. Speaker, please join me, and let’s
get this done.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from
Texas (Ms. ESCOBAR), who is a member
of the Appropriations Committee.
Ms. ESCOBAR. Mr. Speaker, as a
member of the House Homeland Security Appropriations Subcommittee, I
stand today in opposition to this
Homeland Security appropriations bill.
I want to be very clear. The bill that
passed out of committee had protections for U.S. citizens against what we
are seeing playing out in Minnesota
and other American cities. During our
debate in the House Appropriations
Committee, I successfully amended the
bill to include language that would prevent ICE from apprehending and deporting U.S. citizens. When the bill was
reported out of committee, it included
my amendment.
However, during negotiations, I was
told that the White House, Stephen
Miller in particular, stripped my
amendment from the bill. This means
that Donald Trump does not want to
protect U.S. citizens.
Let that sink in, Mr. Speaker.
Donald Trump does not want U.S.
citizens protected from being detained
and deported by ICE.
The Trump agenda has never been
about apprehending and deporting the
worst of the worst. Their own statistics
prove that. Their stories reported by
journalists on the ground prove that,
and eyewitness and firsthand accounts
prove that.
U.S. citizens, alongside lawful immigrants and members of vibrant communities, including children as young as 5
years old, are being targeted by ICE
and Border Patrol in the kinds of
abuses many of us never believed would
happen in America: indiscriminate
stops on the streets, racial profiling,
people dragged from their cars and
their homes, legal observers physically
assaulted for documenting abuses,
theft and destruction of property, and
people being killed by agents.
Violations of law, violations of the
Constitution, and violations of civil
rights are happening here in America
at the hands of the American Government, specifically, the Department of
Homeland Security. This cannot stand.
Mr. Speaker, I urge all of my colleagues to vote ‘‘no.’’
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the
balance of my time.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Cali-

PO 00000

Frm 00141

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

fornia (Mr. TAKANO), who is the distinguished ranking member of the Veterans’ Affairs Committee.
Mr. TAKANO. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
vehement opposition to giving one
more red cent to ICE and CBP until we
see accountability and reforms in this
DHS funding bill. Under Secretary
Noem’s and President Trump’s action,
ICE and CBP have turned from law enforcement agencies into something
much more dark and much more sinister.
Americans are scared by masked
agents roaming our streets arresting
anyone in eyesight whom they deem to
be a threat, not a court of law. They
are terrified that they could be the
next Renee Good or one of the many
who have died in for-profit detention
camps. They worry about sending their
kids to school or doing right by the law
and attending routine immigration
hearings.
It cannot continue. Today, Congress
has a chance to act.
Now, I understand that there are
some decent parts to this bill unrelated
to ICE or the CBP. However, giving
more taxpayer dollars to fund this
wave of violence without accountability for past abuses and reforms to
prevent more tragedies is not just a
mistake, it is complicity.
Instead, we need courage, courage to
demand guardrails that every single
America can support. When there is a
shooting or another abuse, an independent investigation should be standard.
Mr. Speaker, when ICE kicks down
your door, a warrant signed by a judge
must be present. If you are speaking
Spanish, Mr. Speaker, or have skin
color that is other than white, you
should not be detained just because of
how you look or the language you
speak.
Mr. Speaker, should you encounter
an immigration officer, they should no
longer be able to shield themselves
from accountability behind a face
mask.
In the United States of America, nobody should feel like they have to
carry a passport in their own country
to prove that they are a citizen or a
legal permanent resident. No American
should be made, Mr. Speaker, to carry
a passport in the land of the free and
the home of the brave.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I continue to
reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentleman from New
York (Mr. NADLER).
Mr. NADLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
strong opposition to this legislation because I cannot, in good conscience,
vote to spend one more cent on ICE. I
will not fund an agency that acts like
an American gestapo.
The
Trump
administration
has
launched a brutal and reckless campaign to strike fear in immigrant communities across the country, and ICE is
on the front lines, using aggressive and
violent tactics that too often end in

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.056

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1316

tragedy. I cannot support one more
cent for an agency that would recklessly take the life of Renee Good, an
innocent and defenseless young woman.
I cannot support one more cent for
masked agents arresting U.S. citizens,
pulling people out of their homes, tearing children away from their parents,
and stating that it is exempt from the
constitutional requirement for search
warrants. I cannot support one more
cent for detention facilities with the
highest death rate in decades and that
fail to meet the basic medical needs of
detainees. No wonder they refuse to
allow access to Members of Congress.
To support one more cent for an
agency with such disregard for the rule
of law and basic human decency would
be a moral outrage.
Mr. Speaker, vote ‘‘no’’ on this legislation.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I continue to
reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield
11⁄2 minutes to the gentleman from
Rhode Island (Mr. MAGAZINER).
Mr. MAGAZINER. Yesterday, at this
time, Liam Ramos was at his preschool
in Minneapolis, and today, as we speak,
he is in a prison cell in Texas against
the will of his parents.
Mr. Speaker, what are we doing here?
I am a member of the Committee on
Homeland Security, and under the
Biden administration, I pushed for
more resources to secure the border. I
know that we need to enforce immigration laws, but not like this.
They are sending masked agents into
American neighborhoods. They are
beating people in the streets. They are
breaking into homes without a judicial
warrant, profiling people based on their
appearance or their accent, and detaining them if they don’t have their citizenship papers on them.
Mr. Speaker, is this what we have become, a country where everyone has to
carry their citizenship papers around
in case masked men come and threaten
to beat them, detain them, and throw
them into a vehicle?
Is that what we have become?
By the Department of Homeland Security’s own data, the vast majority of
the people whom they have detained
have no criminal record at all. They
are detaining and deporting U.S. military veterans, children with cancer,
and pregnant women. We don’t have to
do it like this. We can enforce immigration laws without this level of cruelty.
Now they are asking us to give them
a blank check to continue funding this.
We, as a Congress, need to start doing
our jobs and put commonsense guardrails in place.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote ‘‘no’’ on this bill until there are
real guardrails in the way that DHS is
behaving.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I continue to
reserve the balance of my time.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, as I said in my opening,
this is a bill that has gotten so much

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

attention over the past few days, and I
think that that is the reality of where
we are.
I have watched this bill over the
years, and it has always been a struggle to deal with the Homeland Security
bill. I thought that we were really on
track to be able, this time around, to
make some significant progress in the
Homeland Security bill, and we were
on track to do that.
However, then we watched unfold an
unspeakable tragedy in Minnesota: the
unspeakable loss of a young woman
who was killed.
b 1410
We have heard from my colleagues
from Minnesota not just about the killing of Renee Nicole Good, but of the
other unspeakable transgressions by an
agency that has made a determination
that they are not accountable to anyone, to no law, no rule of law, and even
no higher calling of understanding how
you treat human beings.
They have run roughshod over United
States citizens. No one here believes
that criminals in this Nation shouldn’t
be deported or that they shouldn’t face
the legal system that we have because
the strength of the United States is
that we are a nation of laws; that we
abide by the rule of law. This agency is
defying this at every step of the way,
every day, with the sanctioning of the
President of the United States saying
that we are going to work to increase
the pain, that we are going to detain
and potentially deport United States
citizens.
We asked for some simple reforms:
Don’t deport United States citizens.
Require the training and hiring of personnel that are competent and capable
for this job.
Do you know that training has gone
from 5 to 8 months to 6 to 8 weeks? The
sensitivity around this issue has been
broken, and the trust of the American
people and the people of Minnesota has
been broken. Children are frightened.
Families are frightened. There is no
need for that in this country.
We need to have the rule of law reinstated. We can’t have masked, armed
people on the street pulling over anyone that they choose to based on the
color of their skin or how they look.
I said this in the Rules Committee
when I testified. I actually have two
grandsons who are adopted. I have one
from Guatemala. Yes, he is brownskinned, but he is a citizen. He lives in
Los Angeles. I find myself telling him,
‘‘Make sure you carry your passport,’’
because it scares me that, because of
his brown skin, he can be pulled aside,
detained, and deported. He is a United
States citizen.
My other grandson’s parentage is Uzbekistan, but he is a United States citizen. He is a youngster, and he could be
snatched up and separated from us.
This is the United States of America.
We have watched and focused on Iran.
We watched the SAVAK in Iran take
people off the street, detain them, kill

PO 00000

Frm 00142

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

them, and never heard from them
again. We are not going down that
road. We cannot go down that road.
The Congress cannot take us down that
road.
I was hopeful, as the ranking member
of the Appropriations Committee—and
my colleague and the chair knows
this—to get what we need to get done,
and we were on the road. We were on a
good track, but we have to face the circumstances.
We have to deal with the environment. We have to deal with what has
happened in this country. We cannot
turn a blind eye. We cannot say let’s
overlook it because if we overlook it, it
will not get better. It is our responsibility now to make it better so that we
can turn this around and make this
agency work.
I am not for abolishing ICE. There
will be a lot of people who are going to
be unhappy with my saying that, but
so be it. We need to reform it. We need
to turn it around. We need to make it
work on behalf of the American people,
not make it the fear that a KGB, a
SAVAK, or other agencies have had in
other countries that we oppose. We
can’t go down the road of making that
who we are. It is our responsibility. It
is our responsibility.
I have said to my colleagues over and
over again: Make the decision based on
where your heart is and what you believe in. This is a moment and a vote
that says you have to determine what
you believe is the right thing to do,
and that is the basis on which to do it.
I have made that decision, and the
right thing for me to do is to vote ‘‘no’’
on this bill.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. COLE. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself the balance of my time.
I want to begin by thanking two outstanding appropriators: Mr. AMODEI,
the chairman of the Homeland Security Subcommittee of Appropriations,
and his working partner and colleague,
the ranking member, the gentleman
from Texas (Mr. CUELLAR). They have
done an extraordinary job on this bill.
We have heard a lot of rhetoric
today. Not much of it has anything to
do with what is in the bill. The bill
itself is a good, strong bill. It is a bill
for, frankly, the two Members who
worked well together. It is not a perfect bill, as my friend Mr. CUELLAR
said, certainly not from his perspective, but it is a solid bill. There are no
poison pills in this bill.
It focuses on making the American
people more secure. It does so economically and efficiently, and it does so in
a way that, honestly, should make
every member of the committee proud.
This is a difficult bill to bring forward, no doubt about that. Each side
has struggled with it over the years. I
am very proud that the ranking member and the chairman worked together
to bring a bill to the floor. That has
not happened in a long, long time. Usually, it just sort of gets muddled in. It

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.057

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

says a great deal about their professionalism and their cooperation.
If you listened to the debate, you
would think we have law enforcement
in chaos and that somehow our country
is not secure. Quite the opposite is
true. Quite frankly, President Trump
should be commended for what he and
his administration have accomplished
in a matter of weeks and months that
most of us thought would take years.
Our borders are secure. They are
more secure now than they have ever
been. It wasn’t that long ago that I was
on this floor talking about 15,000 a day,
10,000 a day coming in illegally. That
has stopped.
As a consequence of that, crime has
gone down, not up. That is a great success for the American people. Drug
trafficking is down, not up. That is a
great success for the American people.
The scourge of human trafficking, the
exploitation of usually young women
and young men, has been dramatically
lowered. That is thanks to President
Trump, the people who he has put in
charge of our border security and our
internal security, and the hard work of
our Coast Guard.
There is a lot in this bill that has
nothing to do with ICE. We fund the
Border Patrol here. Are we supposed to
not pay those men and women who
have kept us secure? We fund the Coast
Guard, which, as my friends point out
and the distinguished chair of this
committee pointed out, has been refocused on some of the maritime security issues, particularly relating to foreign adversaries as far away as China.
b 1420
This bill deals with FEMA, the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
If you are voting against this bill, you
are voting against funding the people
who will help you in a hurricane and a
tornado or a disaster of some sort. Why
in the world should they be penalized?
I think we should look at the bill in
its totality. We should look at the difficulty of the task that we asked the
chairman and the ranking member to
do. We should thank them for the hard
work and wisdom that they both exhibited in bringing this product to the
floor.
Mr. Speaker, I do worry about the
rhetoric around this bill. I personally
believe it is not intentional, but it is
reckless encouraging people to believe
that we have masses of bad actors in a
particular agency. Some of the rhetoric—mostly not on this floor, let me
say that—that I have heard in the
country about comparing law enforcement officers to the gestapo or the
Nazis, that is terrible. That is not true.
That is not who they are. That is not
what they do. That kind of rhetoric,
when we hear it and wherever we hear
it from, is dangerous and reckless and
wrong.
We have had a good debate here
today on a variety of bills, and I will
end on a little more positive note.
Mr. Speaker, I, again, thank my
friend, the ranking member, for her

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1317

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

work. We don’t always agree on everything. This bill is probably an example
of that, but we work together well and
professionally. One of the reasons we
can consider this bill separately is my
friend made that request and made it
very convincingly to me. I know she is
a person of good faith, and I will work
with her wherever I can.
Again, I thank her for her friendship
and leadership. We will not agree on
this matter today, on this particular
item, but there is much, much more
that we agree on than we disagree on.
We would not have gotten to this point
without working together.
Having said that, I do think this is
pretty clear, Mr. Speaker. The right
thing to do here is to fund the people
that protect America, that defend our
borders, that help us in times of disaster, and, yes, who find criminals who
have come into the country illegally,
committed crimes, and make sure they
are expelled. That makes America
safer and better and more secure.
I thank the President and his administration for doing that. I think we
should rally around them and show our
support for what they have done by
passing this legislation.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this bill, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
MESSMER). All time for debate has expired.
Pursuant to House Resolution 1014,
the previous question is ordered on the
bill, as amended.
The question is on the engrossment
and third reading of the bill.
The bill was ordered to be engrossed
and read a third time, and was read the
third time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on passage of the bill.
Pursuant to clause 10 of rule XX, the
yeas and nays are ordered.
Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question will
be postponed.
f

REMOVAL OF THE USE OF UNITED
STATES
FORCES
FOR
HOSTILITIES WITHIN OR AGAINST
VENEZUELA
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to
the order of the House of January 21,
2026, I call up the concurrent resolution
(H. Con. Res. 68) to direct the removal
of United States Armed Forces from
Venezuela that have not been authorized by Congress, and ask for its immediate consideration in the House.
The Clerk read the title of the concurrent resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the order of the House of January 21, 2026, the concurrent resolution
is considered read.
The text of the concurrent resolution
is as follows:
H. CON. RES. 68
Resolved by the House of Representatives (the
Senate concurring),

PO 00000

Frm 00143

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

SECTION 1. REMOVAL OF THE USE OF UNITED
STATES FORCES FOR HOSTILITIES
WITHIN OR AGAINST VENEZUELA.

Pursuant to section 5(c) of the War Powers
Resolution (50 U.S.C. 1544(c)), Congress hereby directs the President to remove United
States Armed Forces from Venezuela, unless
explicitly authorized by a declaration of war
or specific statutory authorization for use of
military force.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The concurrent resolution shall be debated for
1 hour, equally divided among and controlled by Representative MAST of
Florida, Representative MEEKS of New
York, and Representative MCGOVERN of
Massachusetts, or their respective designees.
The gentleman from Florida (Mr.
MAST), the gentleman from New York
(Mr. MEEKS), and the gentleman from
Massachusetts (Mr. MCGOVERN) each
will control 20 minutes.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may
have 5 legislative days in which to revise and extend their remarks and include any extraneous material on the
resolution under consideration.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Florida?
There was no objection.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I am going to say this
twice, once for each of my colleagues
over here managing, Representative
MEEKS and Representative MCGOVERN:
There are no troops in Venezuela.
Let me say it one more time for you
all: There are no troops in Venezuela.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, it was only last month
that we stood on this floor debating
this same resolution. My colleagues
across the aisle defended the administration’s claim that unauthorized U.S.
military operations in the Caribbean
and threats against Venezuela were
about what? Stopping drugs.
At that time, I asked a simple question. I asked—and never received an
answer—if this was about drugs, why
did the President pardon the former
leader of Honduras, a convicted drug
trafficker who bragged about shoving
drugs up the noses of the gringos.
The administration’s own actions
have since made the truth absolutely
clear: This was never about drugs.
The unauthorized January 3 operation was not conducted to address an
imminent threat to the United States,
nor to advance democracy in Venezuela. Donald Trump has abandoned
even the pretense of national security.
He has been very explicit about what
his intent is: We are there to take Venezuela’s oil. That is what this was
about.
He propped up Maduro’s regime,
praised Maduro’s Vice President as a

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.059

H22JAPT1

H1318

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

terrific person, and sidelined the democratic opposition, forcing Maria Corina
Machado through the back door of the
White House.
Meanwhile,
Marco
Rubio,
Pete
Hegseth, and Stephen Miller posture as
viceroys of America’s newest colony,
while American taxpayers are on the
hook to ensure Trump’s oil baron
friends are fed the spoils.
Guess what. There is no plan for what
comes next. There is no plan to deal
with the entrenched military and paramilitary forces spread across a country
twice the size of Iraq. There is no plan
if the so-called acting President refuses
to serve as Trump’s puppet, and no explanation of what the President means
when he says he is ‘‘not afraid of putting boots on the ground.’’
b 1430
Mr. Speaker, this administration is
winging it and driving the United
States headfirst into another openended foreign conflict that, as history
has shown, is destined to backfire in
years to come.
For those of my colleagues who deny
this is warmongering, there is still a
U.S. aircraft carrier parked in the Caribbean. Tens of thousands of young
American men and women remain on
standby. If the President wants to drag
the United States into a war that the
American people don’t want—they
don’t want this—he must come to Congress first.
The debate belongs on this floor. We
have all asked for what the cost has
been and what the cost will be to the
American people. There have been no
answers to that either.
Let’s be equally clear. Venezuela is
not the end of this recklessness. In exchange for a rules-based system the
United States built to extend our influence around the globe, Donald Trump
is reducing the United States to a regional bully with fewer allies and more
enemies. This isn’t making America
great again. It is making us isolated
and weak.
Donald Trump’s new world order is
not new. It is the old logic of empires.
Might makes right. The strong take
from the weak. It is the same backwards worldview that Vladimir Putin
uses in Ukraine and the same logic
China will cite when it looks at Taiwan. We have seen where that road
leads. It leads to endless conflict.
To my Republican colleagues, the
American people want us to lower their
cost of living, not enable war. Now is
the time for my colleagues to stand by
their oath of office and end this dangerous game before it is too late.
It is time for Congress to reclaim our
Article I authority that the Constitution gave us and say that enough is
enough. A President is not a king. He
is not an emperor. Without an act of
Congress, he cannot invade a nation
and set us down the road of war.
Let us stand up and do our responsibilities. Let’s see where Congress
stands. Let’s have a vote on this floor

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

and see where the majority of the
Members of the United States House of
Representatives is. The people deserve
to know.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I want to start by saying something simple that shouldn’t be
controversial in the people’s House. On
questions of war and peace, on questions of life and death, Congress is not
supposed to be a potted plant. We don’t
get paid to outsource hard decisions.
We don’t get brownie points for showing up.
Our Founders weren’t naive about
threats, but they were realistic about
power. That is why they chose to entrust Congress with the power to make
war—not the President, not the courts,
not the States—but the elected Representatives of the people.
Call me crazy, but I think if we abdicate that power, we are not only doing
a disservice to the people we represent
but we are violating our sacred oath of
office, our oath to protect and defend
the Constitution of the United States.
The last time I brought up this resolution, I was told it was premature because there had been no strikes in Venezuela. Let me quote what my Republicans friends said in their own words.
Chairman MAST said: ‘‘ . . . this resolution to me doesn’t make much sense
because we are not in hostilities inside
Venezuela.’’
Congressman KEITH SELF said: ‘‘ . . .
which is not necessary, as it removes
our Armed Forces from hostilities
against a country where there have
been no hostilities.’’
Congressman WARREN DAVIDSON said:
‘‘ . . . is the contention that this is a
present condition, that there are U.S.
Forces in violation of the War Powers
Resolution, or is it a hypothetical future?’’
Congressman TOM MCCLINTOCK said:
‘‘If
the
President
launched
an
unprovoked attack on Venezuela . . .
without congressional declaration, we
should have this debate. Until then, I
think Democrats would do well not to
cry wolf on such an important matter.’’
Even Susie Wiles, the President’s
own Chief of Staff, said that if he were
to authorize some activity on land,
then we would need Congress.
We got lots of smug lectures from the
other side. Guess what. On January 3,
2026, not only did Donald Trump authorize land activity in Venezuela, but
his administration did not come to
Congress beforehand. We were not even
the first group that he talked to after
the attack on Venezuela.
I guess the best we can get from the
current majority here is that there is
never a good time for Congress to assert its war powers. It is either too
soon or it is too late.
I don’t think it is too late because we
are still dealing with the consequences
of this unauthorized and unlawful mili-

PO 00000

Frm 00144

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

tary strike. Nicolas Maduro, a brutal
tyrant, was removed from power. The
Trump
administration
replaced
Maduro with his own damned vice
president. Is that the big victory that
my friends think we should be celebrating? Meet the new boss. Same as
the old boss.
They left in power the same illegitimate regime that rules through oppression, fraud, and violence. They left
in control the same security apparatus
that violates people’s rights. They preserved the same corrupt cartel state.
Am I missing something here? From
what I can tell, the President put our
troops in harm’s way without congressional consent, all so that he could replace one dictator with another dictator. Everything is the same except
the face at the podium.
Now the President says he is the one
running Venezuela. I don’t even know
what the hell that means.
He says we control the oil. What happens if the Venezuelan people don’t
want that? Will he send troops into
Venezuela? What is the clearly defined
mission here? I don’t know what it is.
Look at what has happened since he
claimed he is in charge. Repression has
gotten worse. Security forces are interrogating people at checkpoints, confiscating phones, and detaining journalists. Again, I ask: What was this all
about? We don’t know what will happen next.
Whether you support Trump’s actions or oppose them, shouldn’t we all
agree that we should have a debate on
this stuff and that we should authorize
an expansion of military forces if that
is what is in the future? That should be
a debate. We should have a vote on it.
That is all we are asking here.
This is crazy. We can’t be asleep at
the switch. There is no oversight, no
hearings, and no votes. It is just blind
obedience to the executive. That is not
the way this place is supposed to run.
If my colleagues respect this institution, the House of Representatives,
they will vote ‘‘yes’’ to stop this madness from going any further than it already has. We ought to vote on these
issues.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, neither of my colleagues bothered to say anything about
what their bill they are bringing forward actually does. They didn’t say a
word about it. Let’s quote their own
bill for them, since they clearly don’t
want to talk about it.
They want to ‘‘remove U.S. Forces
from hostilities in Venezuela.’’ That is
what the bill says. Anybody can go and
read it, black ink, white paper. Let’s
get straight to the point.
The U.S. is not at war with Venezuela. I know they all predicted there
was going to be some forever protracted war, but we were never at war
with Venezuela. There are no boots on
the ground. Democrats are asking us to

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.062

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

vote on a resolution about a situation
that literally does not exist.
We do not have anybody there in
Venezuela fighting. There are no tanks
on the ground in Caracas. There are no
snipers in the tree line. It doesn’t exist.
Again, we are not at war.
Maybe they are conferring about that
right now. Let me confer with my colleagues a minute.
Are we at war?
I confirmed with my staff we are not
at war.
Are there any troops on the ground?
I confirmed with my staff also there
are no troops on the ground.
Mr. Speaker, they should confer with
their staff. I see them doing that.
Their Senate Democrat colleagues
tried to bring this exact same resolution to the floor of the Senate, but
even the Senate was smart enough to
pull it because they didn’t want to be
embarrassed. Let’s say it again. We are
not at war.
Most of the Democrats predicted that
we were going to be in some forever
war. Which, again, by the way, they
said after the strike hitting the Iranian
nuclear facilities, their nuclear infrastructure, they all said we were going
to be in a forever war. We weren’t.
Then they said the same thing years
ago when President Trump killed
Qasem Soleimani. We were going to be
in this forever protracted war. Guess
what. We weren’t. We haven’t been, not
for one moment since then.
b 1440
My Democratic colleagues are batting zero in predicting forever wars.
Operation Absolute Resolve was a law
enforcement action to bring Nicolas
Maduro, an indicted narcoterrorist
with a $50 million bounty, to justice.
President Trump finished the job.
Thank you, President Trump, for finishing the job.
It was literally over before breakfast.
I have been in war. I can tell you that
an operation that is over before breakfast is not a war.
The Department of War—let me say
this again—is not engaged in any hostilities within the Venezuelan territory
or with the Venezuelan military. They
are not in tank battles. There are no
tactical operations centers there.
There are no convoys. There are no
U.S. mess halls over there. There are
no field hospitals. There are no trenches with infantry soldiers shooting at
each other. We were not even there
long enough for soldiers to heat up an
MRE.
That is what we eat in the field in
the military, guys.
Yet, just to give you a level of peace
of mind because you are curious about
this, Secretary Rubio confirmed in his
letter last week that no U.S. Armed
Forces are in Venezuela. He also confirmed that, should there be any military operations that would put our
forces into hostilities with Venezuela,
that the administration will provide
the appropriate notifications to Con-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1319

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

gress; he literally said this in his letter.
What is this really about, this resolution that you all refused to even say a
word about in your opening statements? It is about spite. It is about the
fact that you don’t want President
Trump to arrest Maduro, and you will
condemn him no matter what he does,
even though he brought Maduro to justice with possibly the most successful
law enforcement operation in history.
Your hypocrisy is clear, as you chant
and you lead your no kings protests,
but when it comes to taking down a
dictator, you crawl into a corner. You
curl up, and you start to cry about it.
This is about your base having protests to free Maduro. This is about appeasing your far-left friends. Now,
whether my colleagues want to admit
it or not, the world is a safer place because President Trump had the backbone and the stones to do what nobody
else would: bring Nicolas Maduro to
justice.
Let me say this as affirmatively as
possible: If anybody votes ‘‘yes’’ on
this War Powers Resolution that my
colleagues didn’t want to describe,
they are stupid. Because, again, there
is nobody at war and there are no
forces in hostilities in Venezuela. It
would be like them calling me today to
take a pie out of the oven that we all
ate a month ago.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to address their remarks to the Chair.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, do you know what happened in the Senate? They had a vote.
First, five Republicans joined Democrats, but in his general style, two of
them were very threatened by the
President and had to reverse their vote
the next week.
We need to have the vote here and
see if the courage that the five first
showed and the three that continued to
show, whether my colleagues on the
other side are going to have the courage to stand up and do their jobs and
make sure that the power that we have
in the House of Representatives to
oversee the executive branch and not
just be a patsy to this executive branch
exists.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from Connecticut (Mr.
HIMES), the ranking member of the
House Intelligence Committee.
Mr. HIMES. Mr. Speaker, not much
surprises me anymore, but to sit here
and to listen to the storied House Foreign Affairs Committee, chaired by
somebody who calls the opposition stupid, to hear our motivations as we
stand up for a fundamental constitutional prerogative mocked through ad
hominem attacks, shame, sir. Shame.
We are here because we are standing
for our constitutional right to be consulted on the most consequential decision that the United States can make:

PO 00000

Frm 00145

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

whether we engage in hostilities and
put young men and women at risk.
The chairman’s summer stock theater and cringey antics notwithstanding, this has nothing to do with
whether there are troops on the ground
in Venezuela. We will stipulate to your
argument, pathetic as it is, Mr. Speaker.
What this is about is whether what
we saw happen 3 weeks ago will happen
again. There were boots on the ground
3 weeks ago, and we didn’t know about
it. This resolution is about saying that
on the most consequential thing that
this Congress can do, we have a voice—
the Representatives of the people, the
Article I authority.
Let’s set aside Venezuela. I won’t use
that term again. Let’s stand up for our
constitutional rights to be consulted
for what may happen tomorrow, the
day after tomorrow, or next week. Not
much surprises me anymore.
Mr. Speaker, I have watched my majority friends completely abandon their
policy positions, brutally anti-immigration because of this President, obliterating free trade, completely leaving behind everything that the Republican Party used to stand for, praising
Vladimir Putin, and attacking our
NATO allies.
Mr. Speaker, policy flexibility is not
the worst thing in the world. I wish it
weren’t happening because of the reason that it is happening, but policy
flexibility is one thing. Yet abrogating
your constitutional duty to be consulted into authorized force and then
to be mocked for it, shame, sir. Shame.
We need to stand up as an institution
and say that we get consulted on the
most consequential things that we can
do.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Once
again, Members are reminded to direct
their comments to the Chair.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I just say to the distinguished chairman that his arguments
are: It is either too early, or it is too
late.
Our troops were on the ground. Our
troops were shot at. They were wounded. Thankfully, they are home and
they are safe. With this, all we are saying here is that if you are going to expand and utilize the military again,
you come to Congress and ask for a
vote.
That is not just our prerogative. It is
our responsibility. It is in the Constitution. That is our damn job. If you
don’t want to do it, do something else.
Yet it is our responsibility.
In terms of the gentleman’s interpretation of the War Powers Resolution, I
will simply suggest that maybe he and
his team go to the Congressional Research Service and get a briefing to understand how it works, but this is our
responsibility. It is our job.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the
gentlewoman from Pennsylvania (Ms.
HOULAHAN).
Ms. HOULAHAN. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman for yielding.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.064

H22JAPT1

H1320

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Mr. Speaker, it is really devastating
to listen to the other side talking
about how we somehow were not supposed to be told when boots went on
the ground before. Somehow, we were
lucky enough, by God’s grace, that
nothing bad happened to the men and
women in the service of our Nation.
Yet they actually were injured, seven
of them.
The U.S. military is being used
against Venezuela without congressional authorization, without transparency, and in ways that appear only
designed to benefit the very powerful
amongst us—the oil companies—and
not the Venezuelan people, and certainly not our American people to
whom we are obligated to represent. It
is as simple as that.
The American people don’t want
their sons or their daughters sent into
harm’s way for their missions to Venezuela or to Greenland or to anywhere
else that are undertaken just to enrich
corporations and the most wealthy
amongst us and cronies of the President’s, and to do nothing in the process
to lower the cost of living, to help families afford housing or healthcare, or to
secure a future for our children.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
an additional 30 seconds to the gentlewoman from Pennsylvania.
Ms. HOULAHAN. Mr. Speaker, I am
struck by the fact that we are at a
place where we have maligned others in
the past for brutish isolationism and
for colonial instincts that we have long
condemned in our own adversaries.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues on
both sides of this aisle to vote ‘‘yes,’’
to do our jobs so that we may reaffirm
our authority and rein in reckless action.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, before I
yield to my friend, I will say that this
will probably be the only apology that
they will get out of me today: I apologize for talking about the resolution
and the text of the resolution that they
still refuse to talk about. They are not
willing to do that.
Mr. Speaker, I yield such time as he
may consume to the gentleman from
Arkansas (Mr. CRAWFORD), chairman of
the Intelligence Committee.
b 1450
Mr. CRAWFORD. Mr. Speaker, I
thank Chairman MAST for yielding and
for his leadership on this critical issue.
Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about
it, we are not at war with Venezuela.
Nicolas Maduro is a murderer, an autocrat, a narcoterrorist, and a thug
who has oppressed his own people, stolen elections, and turned a once prosperous and free country into a desperate nation that millions have fled.
Most importantly, as for the action
that the United States took against
him on January 3, he is a criminal, an
indicted fugitive from U.S. justice.
My colleagues on the other side of
the aisle have demanded Maduro’s re-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

moval for years, after the stolen 2024
election, the fraudulent 2018 election,
and the Constituent Assembly power
grab in 2017.
In fact, H. Res. 1409 of the 118th Congress is a Democrat-sponsored resolution with the unambiguous title of
‘‘Standing in solidarity with the Venezuelan people and condemning Nicolas
Maduro’s attempt to steal the Venezuelan Presidential election.’’
Here is another Democratic hit, H.R.
8741 of the 118th Congress, pointing to
the threat to our homeland, defining
Maduro as a person of concern who has
engaged in a ‘‘long-term pattern or serious instances of activity adverse to
the national security of the United
States, the security of critical infrastructure of the United States, or the
safety and security of United States
persons.’’
Who can forget Democrat-sponsored
H.R. 5670 of the 118th Congress that
succinctly called for ‘‘an end to the
usurpation of Presidential authorities
by Nicolas Maduro.’’
Instead of celebrating President
Trump’s historic leadership on this
issue and the unmatched operational
excellence of the United States military, law enforcement officers, and the
intelligence community in carrying
out this historic and heroic effort,
House Democrats are once again putting politics before protecting the
American people.
Mr. Speaker, this hypocrisy is evident in the message coming from congressional Democrats. Earlier this
month, CHUCK SCHUMER stated that
President Trump ‘‘seems content to
drag our country . . . into an endless
war with no plan, no transparency, and
nothing but wishful thinking.’’ Nothing could be further from the truth.
Operation Absolute Resolve was a
masterfully, meticulously planned law
enforcement operation supported by
the U.S. military.
I don’t know how much clearer we
must be with our colleagues on the
other side of the aisle, but the U.S. is
not at war with Venezuela. None of the
actions taken by the Trump administration to execute an arrest warrant on
a criminal constitutes war.
The
Trump
administration
has
briefed both Chambers of Congress in
detail on the operation to bring
Maduro to justice, an action the Democrats in this Chamber would have celebrated had it been carried out by the
feckless and failed Biden administration.
Additionally, Secretary Rubio confirmed again to Congress on January 14
that there are currently no U.S. troops
in Venezuela and that the introduction
of U.S. Armed Forces into future hostilities will be undertaken consistent
with notification of the War Powers
Resolution if required.
Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy of House
Democrats is palpable this afternoon in
this Chamber.
I urge each of my colleagues to vote
down this deeply flawed resolution and

PO 00000

Frm 00146

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

instead thank President Trump for
continuing to take historic action to
place the safety of the American people
first.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Chairman MAST
for his partnership and leadership.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
The last time we were here, the
chairman was talking all about drugs.
Yet, today, I have not heard anything
about drugs. The President said it was
about drugs. That was the imminent
threat to the United States, allegedly.
We don’t hear anything about drugs.
We don’t hear anything about democracy. All we hear about is oil and taking those resources.
The fact of the matter is, they talk
about ‘‘we are not at war.’’ I know that
an aircraft carrier is still sitting right
there where we led the attack before,
where the attack took place. I know
there is a blockade taking place right
now, so our military is still right off
the shore of Venezuela.
I know that we want to make sure
that we take care of our responsibility
as Members of the House of Representatives and have the oversight and safety of the President, should he decide to
strike again, come to the Congress
first.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the
gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr.
DELUZIO).
Mr. DELUZIO. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentleman from New York for the
time.
Mr. Speaker, to respond to the notion
of hypocrisy, that we should rely on
the Secretary of State’s notification
when required, we were not notified—
the Congress did not receive notification—or asked for authorization before
Americans were sent to fight and to
bleed in Venezuela.
Seven Americans were wounded in
that military operation. There is a
functional blockade of Venezuelan oil.
As others have pointed out here, Mr.
Speaker, an aircraft carrier strike
group sits nearby, poised to again send
Americans into Venezuela should the
President order it.
Let’s talk about hypocrisy. In the
118th Congress, this body voted on two
War Powers Resolutions to remove
Americans from hostilities that had
not been authorized by the Congress. In
those two votes, 52 Republicans and 47
Republicans,
respectively,
thought
that Congress ought to have a say
about our war powers. What has
changed? The party of the occupant of
the White House. Be consistent, Mr.
Speaker.
I support this resolution.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, the gentleman keeps
talking about the resolution, and here
it is. I did talk about the resolution,
and let’s talk about the resolution
again. I have it right here. It is two
pages.
The way the resolution is written is
to comply with the War Powers Act.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.066

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

The resolution would simply prevent
further escalation. If you are watching
at home, read it yourself, H. Con. Res.
68. The reason we think we need to do
that is because the administration already did not get permission before escalating the first time.
By the chairman’s logic, the only
time we can ever have a vote is if there
are physically boots on the ground.
That just is logically insane. It doesn’t
comport with the way the War Powers
Act is written. By his logic, the President should be able to launch a preemptive nuclear war without congressional authorization. That is nuts.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 11⁄2 minutes to
the gentleman from New York (Mr.
RYAN).
Mr. RYAN. Mr. Speaker, I thank the
gentleman for the time.
Mr. Speaker, we face a fundamental
question here: Who makes the decision
to send our most precious resource, our
young men and women in uniform, into
harm’s way? Is it a five-time draft
dodger who has called them suckers
and losers, or is it the American people
with us as their voices?
Mr. Speaker, I was on the receiving
end of this same chicken-hawk bs for 27
months in combat in Iraq, and I don’t
need to be lectured by my colleagues.
We all know how that went: thousands
of American lives lost; trillions of dollars spent not on one, but two forever
wars over the last 20-plus years that we
should not have started in the first
place; and, most importantly, no honest conversation with the American
people about what would be required,
what blood and treasure would be
spilled halfway across the world.
Now, we are seeing it all play out
again. History doesn’t repeat, but it
certainly rhymes. We in this room had
the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of State come to Congress before the end of this calendar year and
blatantly lie to our faces and, more importantly, lie to the American people.
Why? Because they know it isn’t right
or popular.
The last thing, Mr. Speaker, the
American people want is another regime change war, a forever war for oil.
I urge my colleagues to support this
resolution and to not repeat history.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, there it was again, a
forever war. President Trump has
never brought America into a forever
war. Any operation he has conducted is
pretty much done before breakfast,
just like Venezuela.
I think my Democrat colleagues
can’t wrap their heads around that
something can be about more than one
thing at a time. It can be about
Maduro and his lawlessness. It can be
about drugs. It can be about the people
of Venezuela. It can also be about making sure sanctioned oil doesn’t flow
around the globe. It can be about more
than one thing.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from Florida (Mr. DIAZBALART), my friend.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1321

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Mr. DIAZ-BALART. Mr. Speaker,
here we go again. As Chairman MAST
has said, there are no troops in Venezuela.
Look, the only purpose of this resolution, let’s be clear, is to counter and
stop narcoterrorism and drug traffickers in this hemisphere.
I know that so many on the radical
left are upset that Maduro, the head of
the Cartel de los Soles, was picked up
and brought to New York to stand
trial. These narcoterrorists are responsible for the deaths of thousands of
Americans every single year because of
drugs. Every time the U.S. eliminates
one of these drug boats, it actually
saves American lives.
Let’s talk about what is actually
going on. While there are no U.S.
troops, the men and women of the
Armed Forces, what they are doing is
they have struck 35 drug boats smuggling drugs that kill Americans. They
have seized seven oil tankers attempting to evade sanctions.
It is very simple. Let’s not protect
those drug dealers, those cartels. Let’s
protect the American people. The way
to do that is to vote ‘‘no’’ on this resolution.
b 1500
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, again, my
Democrat colleagues are not speaking
about the words of the resolution, the
basic grammar. It says: Remove forces
from hostilities. There are no forces in
Venezuela. They can’t just make up
words. I know they like to do that.
They like to say plural pronouns can
be used on one person and things like
that, but they can’t just make up
grammar. Write the bill right if you
want to do it. Mr. Speaker, I reserve
the balance of my time.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 5
minutes to the gentlewoman from
Florida (Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ), an
individual who has truly been fighting
for democracy for the Venezuelan people, who wants them to have the right
to vote, an individual who has stood
and is trying to keep their TPS status
so they are not forced back into the regime of Maduro.
Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ. Mr.
Speaker, I thank the gentleman for
yielding.
I rise in support of this resolution because I simply do not trust this President to truly prioritize democracy and
the will of the Venezuelan people.
I represent one of the largest Venezuelan communities in the country.
Many of my constituents fled brutal repression under Chavez and Maduro.
Most of them were glad to see Maduro
captured and face justice, and so was I.
Maduro is a murderous criminal who
tortured, imprisoned, impoverished,
and oppressed his people. He stole elections, jailed his opponents, drained his
nation’s wealth, and unleashed the
largest peacetime refugee crisis in history.
Mr. Speaker, 8 million Venezuelans
were driven into exile.

PO 00000

Frm 00147

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

I was glad to see Maduro held accountable, and this resolution, as my
colleague who just spoke, Mr. DIAZBALART, would clearly know, would not
preclude operations like the one that
arrested him, especially if the administration finally does what they should
have already done: come up with a dayafter plan for democracy, present a coherent strategy to Congress, and make
a case to the American people.
Arresting Maduro does not fix Venezuela because Maduro did not destroy
Venezuela by himself. He relied on
criminal affiliates who helped him
cling to power. Delcy Rodriguez, Jorge
Rodriguez, Diosdado Cabello, Vladimir
Padrino Lopez, all of them share
Maduro’s guilt, but instead of being
thrown in jail, they were left in charge.
The machinery of repression was left
in place, and the democratic hopes of
Venezuelans are being left behind.
My constituents who celebrated
Maduro’s capture are horrified to see
President Trump normalize relations
with the same regime that forced them
to flee. This President must not make
the U.S. complicit in the brutal repression of Venezuelans which continues
today.
Yet, Trump continues to jeopardize
the lives of lawful Venezuelan immigrants by forcing them back into the
chaos after he terminated their TPS.
Trump has lavished praise on
Maduro’s hand-picked replacement,
Delcy Rodriguez, who ran the regime’s
torture dungeons. Meanwhile, he has
dismissed and demeaned Venezuela’s
democratic leaders like Maria Corina
Machado and president-elect Edmundo
Gonzalez.
In fact, President Trump hasn’t said
one word about seeking democracy or
human rights in Venezuela.
If Congress backs military action,
then democracy, stability, and safety
for Venezuelans should be the objective. But those aren’t President
Trump’s goals. He only speaks about
getting a cut of the regime’s oil sales
and ignores their ongoing repression.
I have no illusions about the dangers
this regime poses. I am open to the
idea that military action may be needed to achieve democracy. If Trump
truly cared about Venezuelan democracy, he has tools at his disposal. He
has broad authority to defend our national security interests. He could employ covert action, enforce vigorous
sanctions, support civil society groups
on democracy’s front lines, and take
action, as he does, against cartels and
narcoterrorists. He could use his ‘‘tremendous leverage’’ to push for elections in human rights because this resolution doesn’t block any of that.
Instead, Trump is just seeking profits
for the same Big Oil companies who
propped up Maduro for years. He moved
on his own with no plan for democracy,
and he swapped out one dictator for another and declared mission accomplished.
My vote today isn’t about the means
that this President used to capture

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.068

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1322

Maduro. Presidents should use the
power they have to be tough on dictators who abuse their own people. But
given his utter disdain for democracy
and his callous disregard for the chaos
and violence to which law-abiding Venezuelans are being deported, I simply
cannot give this President a blank
check to put troops on the ground.
For all we know, Trump plans to deploy troops to protect the regime’s oil
facilities, not to liberate Venezuelans.
I have known Maria Corina Machado
for years, but this week I was able to
finally meet her in person for the first
time. She is remarkable, inspiring, and
I have total faith in her selfless dedication to bring Venezuela out of darkness. More importantly, Venezuelans
have faith in her.
When she spoke, she discussed the essential momentum the democracy
movement needs and the danger of allowing this lingering dictatorship to
reinforce its grip on power. She told us
conditions on the ground are dire, that
we cannot allow the regime and the
military militias to strengthen their
hold on power.
Maria Corina has a vision to resurrect Venezuela, and there is a U.S. role
to see it through. That is why it is so
disturbing that her White House meeting ended with no firm commitments,
no timeline for elections, and no guarantees from President Trump.
Instead of opening a pathway to democracy, this President is focused on
opening offshore accounts to hoard
Venezuelan oil money.
So I support this resolution because
of my faith in Maria Corina Machado,
not in spite of it. It is rooted in an ongoing commitment to standing resolutely with Venezuelans to demand an
end to this illegal regime. It is aligned
with my belief that a transition to democracy led by Maria Corina Machado
and Edmundo Gonzalez must take
place.
I hope I am wrong about the President’s motivation.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentlewoman from Florida.
Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ. Mr.
Speaker, I hope I am wrong about the
President’s motivations, and he brings
Congress a real strategy to transition
Venezuela to democracy. I hope he was
moved by Maria Corina Machado’s vision and not just her Nobel Prize. I am
a show-me person, not a tell-me person,
and so far President Trump has shown
that he is more concerned with seizing
Venezuela’s oil than freeing Venezuela
from dictatorship. ‘‘Hasta el final’’;
‘‘Until the end.’’
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
2 minutes to the gentleman from Texas
(Mr. CASTRO).
Mr. CASTRO of Texas. Mr. Speaker,
the President of the United States is
now running Venezuela from Washington.
On January 3, the President ordered
a military operation to capture Nicolas

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Maduro and install the President’s
hand-picked successor, Delcy Rodriguez, as the interim president.
President Trump went to war, removed a leader, and established a puppet government.
The President executed this transition when the most popular opposition
leader, Nobel Prize winner Maria
Corina Machado, was out of the country. If he wanted to, the President
could help her return to Venezuela. It
is telling that he is not.
Article I of the Constitution of the
United States makes it clear that Congress has the sole authority to declare
war.
The President, in taking these actions without our consent, has trampled on the separation of powers and
taken the American people into yet another war that they do not want and
cannot afford.
People are wondering and they are
asking: What was it for? Was it to remove the socialists? No, the socialists
are still in power. Delcy Rodriguez is a
true believer in the same ideology and
party that Hugo Chavez and Nicolas
Maduro championed.
Was it to remove drug dealers in the
hemisphere? No, the same Venezuelan
Government that he says is dealing
drugs is still in charge because of him.
So clearly this is not about socialists, and it is not about drugs.
Donald Trump has said this is about
oil and enriching multibillion-dollar
companies over the will of the American people.
Congress, unfortunately, has not
stood up to his despotic actions.
He is not listening to Congress or to
the American people. He has threatened military action against Greenland, Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, and
Panama; and he has threatened to keep
sidestepping Congress if you will let
him.
At a time when Americans are struggling to pay for rent, groceries, and
childcare, they don’t want us to spend
billions in Venezuela. They would rather we spend that money here.
But somebody is getting rich.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
an additional 30 seconds to the gentleman from Texas.
Mr. CASTRO of Texas. Mr. Speaker,
Donald Trump has set up offshore bank
accounts in Qatar outside the U.S. system, and only he knows where the
money is going.
There is a $500 million slush fund
that the President is controlling right
now. We are not going to benefit from
that.
Now, I ask my colleagues who have
not joined us: How long will you stand
by and be on the sidelines of the most
consequential decision a country can
make, to go to war?
Are we a Congress or are we cowards?
Will you stand up for the American
people, and do what is right?
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, it is always
a laughable argument when Democrats

PO 00000

Frm 00148

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

try to say the President is enriching
himself.
Just as one example, in this case you
don’t see him collecting a $50 million
bounty for bringing in Nicolas Maduro,
a bounty that the previous administration agreed with, because he is never in
it for the money. He is in it for America every single time.
I would encourage them to talk to
their
colleague,
Ms.
WASSERMAN
SCHULTZ, and ask her if things are better or worse for Venezuelans today
than they were under Maduro.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from Florida (Mr. FINE).
b 1510
Mr. FINE. Mr. Speaker, I thank the
chairman for yielding me time.
My friend, the chairman, referred to
stupidity in debating this resolution. I
would like to talk about hypocrisy and
illiteracy. Ten days before Joe Biden
left office, he raised the bounty on
Nicolas Maduro to $25 million. Now, I
don’t know if my Democratic colleagues thought that he would go:
Wow, $25 million, maybe I should just
turn myself in.
I would like to believe that when
they put that bounty out there they
actually believed he should be removed
from office.
There is an old Twitter post from
President Biden that said: ‘‘Trump
talks tough on Venezuela, but admires
thugs and dictators like Nicolas
Maduro.’’
Guess what, Mr. Speaker.
I think President Trump showed in
actions, not words, that he was determined to remove a drug lord, and that
is what Nicolas Maduro was, from
power.
The President doesn’t have to let us
know every time they go and arrest
somebody who has broken the law.
That is exactly what happened here.
Now I want to talk about illiteracy.
My friend, the chairman, talked about
people not understanding what is in
the resolution. Before I got to Congress, I used to complain about really
long bills that no one read before they
voted on them. Well, this one is six
lines long, and it doesn’t talk about
things like my colleague spoke about
like escalation. This resolution deals
with escalation.
That is not what it does. It is six
lines, and two of them say this: ‘‘Congress hereby directs the President to
remove United States Armed Forces
from Venezuela . . . ’’
There aren’t any there.
They proposed to have us vote on
something that is irrelevant because
the action they want to stop is not taking place. There is no war there now.
I think what my colleagues are is
shell-shocked because after all of these
years of empty comments condemning
Maduro, empty statements by them,
empty statements by Joe Biden talking
about how bad of a man he was, we finally have a President who actually
went and did something about it.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.069

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

That is what President Trump did.
We should be proud. We should be
thanking him. We should be supporting
him for what he did, and we should be
voting down this resolution.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I just wonder what kind of man, when a woman
earned the Nobel Peace Prize, Maria
Corina Machado, said that he wanted
it, and she, trying to fight for democracy, came in, and he took it. He didn’t
earn it.
What kind of man does that?
Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the
gentleman from California (Mr. PANETTA).
Mr. PANETTA. Mr. Speaker, the
military intervention in Venezuela left
us with uncertainty, instability, and
insecurity. As a veteran, I commend
the military operation to remove
Maduro on January 3, but as an American, it left uncertainty for the day
after. By replacing one despot with another, we are uncertain as to the government, to the oil, to the cartels, and
to the future of democracy in Venezuela.
This type of military adventurism
can also create instability not just in
Venezuela, but in the region, and that
creates insecurity for the United
States.
As we saw this week about Greenland, the President wants spheres of influence rather than stability from a
rules-based order. Instead of standing
up to China and Russia, the President
just wants to impress them by acting
like them, rather than being better
than them.
That is what happens when we have a
President that doesn’t just want his
own sphere of influence, he wants his
own sphere of governance, especially
when it comes to putting boots on the
ground.
This War Powers Resolution would
not only prevent that in Venezuela
without further congressional approval, it will also demonstrate that
this Congress can actually act like a
coequal branch of government and fulfill our responsibilities under the
United States Constitution.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
3 minutes to the gentleman from Kentucky (Mr. MASSIE).
Mr. MASSIE. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
support of this War Powers Resolution
because the integrity of this institution is in question.
Every Member of this House has a
duty to uphold the Constitution’s system of checks and balances by exercising its Article I powers entrusted to
us.
The executive’s military exercise to
capture the leader of Venezuela represents one of the most blatant
usurpations of congressional authority
we have seen in modern times. If we ignore it, then we are not merely acquiescing to executive overreach, we are
rendering impotent our branch of government.
Thomas Paine said in 1776: ‘‘A long
habit of not thinking a thing wrong

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1323

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

gives it a superficial appearance of
being right.’’
Some of my Republican colleagues
may feel obligated to acquiesce because it is our party occupying the
White House. It is our party who is the
Commander in Chief, but the precedents we tolerate today will inevitably
be used against us tomorrow when the
reins of power change hands. That is
precisely why our loyalty must be to
the Constitution and not to any party.
If our country wants war, then Congress must vote on it. We are the voice
of the people. There is a reason so
many of our offices bear a Prisoner of
War/Missing in Action Flag. It is a solemn reminder of the human cost of war
and our obligation, not the obligation
of a single executive or a private circle
of special interests, to decide when to
go to war.
Even the executive branch knows
that Congress had the authority, not
them.
Do you remember the night of the invasion, Mr. Speaker?
It was the Attorney General who explained this was just a law enforcement
action that the military was merely assisting.
That is the problem we have because
then it became obvious that we were
undertaking a military exercise. If the
unilateral use of force was not enough,
then the executive has compounded
this abuse by seizing Venezuela’s oil
revenues, selling them, and depositing
that money in U.S. Treasury-controlled accounts overseas.
So now the executive presumes the
authority to appropriate money. That
is a direct violation of the U.S. Constitution. Article I, Section 9, Clause 7
of the Constitution is unambiguous:
‘‘No money shall be drawn from the
Treasury, but in consequence of appropriations made by law . . . ’’
There was no law, and there has been
no law to appropriate this money that
was seized in an act of war.
If we allow an executive to seize foreign resources and direct spending
from pillaged accounts without congressional authorization, then people
no longer have a voice in their government, and Congress’ power of the purse
becomes moot.
If the executive believes war is justified, then let Congress declare it. If the
executive believes foreign assets may
be seized, spent, and appropriated, then
let Congress appropriate them. That is
how a Republic functions.
Mr. MAST. My colleague is still not
talking about the six lines of the resolution that says to remove forces from
Venezuela. They are not talking about
it because there are no forces in Venezuela.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from Florida (Mr. STEUBE).
Mr. STEUBE. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
opposition to this resolution because it
is nothing more than a weak and pointless attempt to attack our President
and undermine our national security.
We conducted a 40-minute operation
to remove a drug-trafficking narcoter-

PO 00000

Frm 00149

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

rorist, and Democrats are acting like
we started world war III.
For that brief, targeted action, they
now insist Congress must step in and
tie the President’s hands.
Let’s be clear about how ridiculous
this resolution truly is. It orders the
United States to withdraw forces from
Venezuela, yet there are no U.S. forces
in Venezuela to withdraw. You cannot
remove troops that don’t even exist.
That alone shows how unserious Democrats are in this effort.
They also claim the act to remove
Maduro was unconstitutional, which
ignores Article II and decades of bipartisan precedent where Presidents have
undertaken limited military action
without a declaration of war.
Clinton acted in Kosovo. Obama
acted in Libya. Most similarly, George
H.W. Bush captured drug-trafficker
Manuel Noriega back in 1990. No one
screamed constitutional crisis then. In
fact, those acts were celebrated by
both sides, and they were upheld by
Federal courts.
The bottom line is that Nicolas
Maduro is a criminal defendant
charged by the United States Department of Justice for narcoterrorism and
drug-trafficking offenses, including
conspiring to import cocaine into the
United States and related weapon
charges. He has run his regime like a
cartel: flooding our country with poison and destroying American lives.
This was not an act of war. It was an
act of law enforcement. This resolution
does nothing to protect the Constitution, nothing to make America safer,
and nothing to stop the drugs killing
our communities.
It should be rejected.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
11⁄2 minutes to the gentleman from
Texas (Mr. DOGGETT).
b 1520
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Speaker, oil over
democracy. Trump has made clear his
priorities, accepting ruthless suppression by Maduro’s comrades so long as
the oil profits flow to him as the selfdescribed acting President of Venezuela.
With one major oil company describing the country as uninvestable,
Trump has absolutely no winning
strategy to secure any benefits for the
American people.
He doesn’t just want to be king of
America. He wants to be king of the
universe. He wants to be a Putin or a
Xi, disrupting the global order that bipartisan American leaders made possible to prevent another world war.
Imperialism, starting wars around
the world wherever Trump’s latest
whim takes him, will not Make America Great Again. It will make us much
less safe.
To found this country, Americans got
rid of one despotic king. We don’t need
another one. Instead, we must demand
an accountable President by adopting
this important resolution and asserting
the power of Congress.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.071

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1324

The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
KENNEDY of Utah). Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in
personalities toward the President.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I remind my
colleague that President Trump has
yet to start any war in either administration. His fight every day is protect
the American homeland, protect the
people of the United States of America,
and he has done a damn good job.
I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I am ready
to close, and I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time to close.
Mr. Speaker, I have still not gotten
an answer to the only question that
matters today: Why did we strike Venezuela, spending taxpayer money and
putting American troops in harm’s way
to replace Maduro with his own Vice
President, someone who is an illegitimate ruler who is just as ruthless and
evil as Maduro?
I don’t know why we did that. What
was the point? Not a single one of my
colleagues can answer that question
because they have no answer. They
know voting for this resolution is
right.
If people want to put our troops in
harm’s way, if they genuinely believe
more military action may be necessary
in the future, if that is what you believe, whether to defend oil fields or to
do something else, then you shouldn’t
just pound the damn lectern and wave
the flag. You need to come before this
entire Chamber to move a bill to authorize the use of military force.
My friends should have the guts and
backbone to put an Authorization for
Use of Military Force on the floor.
Spell out the mission. Spell out the objectives. Tell the American people how
long it lasts, what it costs, why it matters, and how we get a legitimate,
democratic government in Venezuela.
Have the guts to vote. That is all this
resolution is requiring, but don’t give
me this bs about how before the strikes
it was premature to vote, and now it is
too late.
I have seen this movie before, Mr.
Speaker. It always starts with the
White House telling us that it will be
quick, clean, and over in a matter of
days. Then, months later, years later,
you get troops deployed, kids coming
home in caskets, and taxpayers paying
for endless quagmires that never end,
and the same people here on the floor
telling us that we are premature or
crying wolf are suddenly nowhere to be
found.
That is the truth, Mr. Speaker. Wars
are easy to start, but they are hard as
hell to stop.
This resolution ought to pass no matter what you believe about further
military involvement in Venezuela.
What it says plainly is that if the
President is contemplating further
military action, then he has a moral
and a constitutional obligation to
come here and get our approval.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

The people we represent did not send
us here to be potted plants while the
White House sleepwalks us into another mess. If this administration
wants to escalate, make the case to the
American people. Get consent through
their elected Representatives. Follow
the Constitution.
Let me tell you what I think. I think
this was all so that Donald Trump
could get a good headline. I think it
was so he could distract from the lousy
economy and the fact that he is still
covering up the Epstein files. I think it
is about theft because the oil being
taken from the people of Venezuela is
being sold off and used to finance a
slush fund in Qatar controlled by, you
guessed it, Donald Trump.
I don’t think I have ever seen such a
brazen example of corruption in my
life. The President of the United States
put American troops in harm’s way so
he could steal oil from Venezuela and
deposit it into his own pocket. I think
it is a disgraceful thing to do.
It is time for my colleagues on both
sides of the aisle to grow a spine, obey
their oath, and do their damn jobs. You
should vote ‘‘yes’’ on this resolution,
whether
you
support
President
Trump’s actions or you disagree with
them.
All this says is simply that if he
wants to expand military operations,
he has to come to Congress. It is that
simple. It is not complicated. This is
about the Constitution. This is about
our oath. This is about representing
the people who sent us here. I mean, to
do anything less is a dereliction of our
duty.
I can’t even believe that this is controversial, the idea that somehow we
don’t want to vote on whether to authorize the use of military force,
whether it is in Venezuela or anywhere
else.
What is wrong with my colleagues
who think this is such a big leap that
this is somehow not justified? Read the
Constitution.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the
President.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself the balance of my time.
The last time I was on this floor, I
had a question, and I still have that
same question. I heard Members on the
other side talk about the President
trying to protect the American people.
In fact, I heard someone—and I understand why Nicolas Maduro was indicted.
I am going to ask the chairman
again. I don’t know whether he wants
to answer this question, but if that is
true, why did the President of the
United States pardon a former leader
of Honduras, the former President, who
was convicted of drug trafficking, who
bragged about shoving drugs up the
noses of the gringos? Why did the
President of the United States pardon
him?

PO 00000

Frm 00150

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

I yield to the gentleman from Florida
to respond to my question.
Mr. MAST. The President never explained it to me. Maybe he was just
trying to make room for Maduro and
his wife.
Mr. MEEKS. Reclaiming my time,
yeah, okay, that is funny. It is because
he does not care. It never was about
drugs. It was always about oil. That is
why. He doesn’t care. That is why he
took the Nobel Peace Prize from someone else who earned it. He doesn’t care.
He cares about one person—himself—
and enriching his family and his
friends.
Mr. Speaker, this War Powers Resolution introduced by Representative
MCGOVERN would put an immediate
end to this administration’s reckless
military interventions in Venezuela.
We cannot allow the Constitution to be
usurped by one President who believes
he can unilaterally declare war, invade
a sovereign nation, and buck the rulesbased international system we helped
build.
If the House fails to check President
Trump’s aggression today, it will not
end in Venezuela. I know the White
House is paying close attention to this
vote, and if we don’t stand now and reassert our Article I power over matters
of war and peace, we will have abdicated one of our most solemn responsibilities and reduced ourselves to a
rubberstamp and become no better
than the Duma in Russia.
Our constituents sent us here to
lower their costs, not to sit on our
hands while the President keeps doing
what he pleases. Let us make sure we
pass this resolution.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself the balance of my time.
Let me answer some of the questions
that my colleagues put up.
Why did President Trump take
Maduro? It was to protect the homeland of the United States of America,
as he has done with action after action
after action. It is the same reason that
two Presidents put a warrant, a bounty, on Nicolas Maduro—not just President Trump, but also President Biden.
That is why Nicolas Maduro was
snatched up, because of his poisoning
of the people of the United States of
America.
Again, something can be true and
also be true about another action and
another action and another action. It
was because of the bounty. It was because of the warrant. It was because of
the drugs that he was bringing to the
United States of America. It was because of his partnership with China,
Iran, and Russia, to be their foothold
in the Western Hemisphere for their
nefarious activities. It was because of
the illegal shipments of oil that they
were moving on Russian ships to China
that were coming out of Venezuela. It
was because of a lot of things that this
took place.
Does the President have a plan for
the future? He does, 100 percent: free

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.073

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

and fair elections, freedom for the people of Venezuela. Ask the people of
Venezuela if that is what they want.
Ask the people of Venezuela if they are
better today than they were before
President Trump snatched up Maduro.
They will tell you they are. They are
more free today, and they are hoping
for more and more freedom each and
every day.
President Trump has brought hope to
our homeland by protecting this homeland that has been ignored for so long.
He has brought hope to so many others
around the globe, the people of Venezuela, people across the Middle East,
people across Europe, people in place
after place because of his actions.
b 1530
He is the peace President. He has
proven it over and over again. He has
never been the President of forever
wars. He has yet to create one. He has
only worked in limited operations that
protect the homeland of the United
States of America and done the best
job of it in the history of the United
States of America.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. All time
for debate has expired. Pursuant to the
order of the House of January 21, 2026,
the previous question is ordered on the
concurrent resolution.
The question is on adoption of the
concurrent resolution.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the noes appeared to have it.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, on
that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question are postponed.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

PREGNANT STUDENTS’ RIGHTS
ACT
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to House Resolution 1009, I call up
the bill (H.R. 6359) to require institutions of higher education to disseminate information on the rights of, and
accommodations and resources for,
pregnant students, and for other purposes, and ask for its immediate consideration in the House.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 1009, the
amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee on Education and Workforce,
printed in the bill, is adopted, and the
bill, as amended, is considered read.
The text of the bill, as amended, is as
follows:
H.R. 6359
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Pregnant Students’ Rights Act’’.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1325

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

SEC. 2. NOTICE OF PREGNANT STUDENT RIGHTS,
ACCOMMODATIONS,
AND
RESOURCES.

Section 485 of the Higher Education Act of
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092) is amended by adding at
the end the following:
‘‘(n) PREGNANT STUDENTS’ RIGHTS, ACCOMMODATIONS, AND RESOURCES.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—Each institution of higher
education participating in any program under
this title shall carry out the information dissemination activities described in paragraph (3)
for prospective and enrolled students (including
those attending or planning to attend less than
full time) regarding the information described in
paragraph (2) on the rights of, and resources
(including protections and accommodations) for,
pregnant students to carry a baby to term and
students who may become pregnant while enrolled at such institution of higher education to
carry a baby to term.
‘‘(2) INFORMATION CONTENT.—The information
described in this paragraph is the following:
‘‘(A) A list of resources on campus and in the
community that exist to help a pregnant student
in carrying the baby to term and caring for the
baby after birth.
‘‘(B) Information about the accommodations
available to help a pregnant student carry the
baby to term and parent the baby after birth.
‘‘(C) Information on how to file a complaint
with—
‘‘(i) the Department of Education, if a student
believes there was a violation by the institution
of title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972
(20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.) on account of such student’s determination to carry a baby to term;
and
‘‘(ii) the institution, if a student believes the
student has been discriminated against in violation of such title IX on account of the student’s
determination to carry a baby to term.
‘‘(3) INFORMATION DISSEMINATION ACTIVITIES.—The information dissemination activities
described in this paragraph shall include—
‘‘(A) an email to each enrolled student at least
once each academic year; and
‘‘(B) the provision of information—
‘‘(i) in student handbooks, if any;
‘‘(ii) at each orientation for enrolled students;
‘‘(iii) at student health or counseling centers,
if any; and
‘‘(iv) on the publicly available website of the
institution of higher education.
‘‘(4) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to authorize the
Secretary to require the dissemination of additional information, or establish additional
rights, beyond the information and rights included in this subsection.’’.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The bill,
as amended, shall be debatable for 1
hour equally divided and controlled by
the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Education and
Workforce or their respective designees.
The gentleman from Michigan (Mr.
WALBERG) and the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. SCOTT) each will control 30
minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Michigan.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members
may have 5 legislative days in which to
revise and extend their remarks and insert extraneous material on H.R. 6359.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Michigan?
There was no objection.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.

PO 00000

Frm 00151

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Mr. Speaker, I rise today in support
of the Pregnant Students’ Rights Act,
legislation that affirms a simple but
powerful principle: Expecting mothers
should be encouraged to pursue their
education like any other student.
Pregnant students often receive incorrect guidance or no guidance at all
on how to navigate classes while pregnant. In many cases, women feel pressured to end their pregnancies or risk
academic failure despite protections
that exist now under Federal law.
The Pregnant Students’ Rights Act
requires schools to clearly communicate what accommodations and protections pregnant and parenting students are entitled to. That includes excused absences for medical needs, the
ability to make up missed work, and
protection from discrimination and retaliation.
More specifically, this bill requires
information to be emailed to students
at least once each academic year and
appear in student handbooks at orientation, at student health or counseling centers, and on the institution’s
website. When students know their
rights, they are empowered to stay enrolled, stay engaged, and succeed.
This legislation doesn’t burden colleges. It simply increases transparency
by helping schools communicate consistently and avoid confusion or unnecessary disputes.
This is a commonsense, compassionate measure that promotes transparency and ensures pregnant students
have the support they need to create a
better future for themselves and their
child.
Mr. Speaker, let’s cherish life for
both the child and his or her mother
who dreams of academic success. I urge
my colleagues to join me in supporting
the Pregnant Students’ Rights Act and
stand up for the dignity, opportunity,
and educational success of every student.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to
H.R. 6359, the Pregnant Students’
Rights Act.
This bill requires schools to provide
pregnant students with information
about on campus and community resources and accommodations to assist
them in carrying a baby to term while
they pursue an education.
Unfortunately, instead of sharing unbiased and comprehensive information,
this bill requires schools to distribute
only partial information about a student’s rights under Title IX and selective information and resources that
solely encourage students to carry a
pregnancy to term.
It provides no information about
rights and accommodations for students who may find themselves in a
medical situation that requires an
abortion. Now, repeating the idea that
comprehensive information must be
provided does not make it true.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.074

H22JAPT1

H1326

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Title IX entitles the students to the
information, but this bill only requires
some of that information to be provided. Now while the bill’s proponents
continue to assert that students are
unaware of their rights, they provide
no justification or evidence that students are any more or less aware of
their rights or accommodations specific to carrying a child to term. If we
are concerned about students who do
not have a full understanding of their
rights, then we should provide all of
the information necessary to address
their concerns.
By shielding students from health information, resources, and the rights
that are available to them, Republicans are denying them the ability to
choose what may be best for them and
their families.
Mr. Speaker, for these reasons, I urge
my colleagues to oppose the bill, and I
reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I just have to go back
to the same argument that we had in
committee.
We don’t prohibit schools from giving
a full panoply of information. Our concern is that they haven’t been.
Pregnant students have been left
without full information, full information that comes and is required by law
under Title IX on all aspects of medical
care, of counseling, and of opportunity.
But sadly, that has been left out as far
as saying if you are pregnant and you
want to continue as pregnant in this
school, we are going to support you in
that.
Title IX gives all of the information.
We are not going to be redundant. We
are just making sure that you also include, young lady, if you are pregnant
and you want to continue in school, we
are going to do our best to help you
and provide all the resources. I just
wish we could catch hold of this.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 5 minutes to the
gentlewoman from Iowa (Mrs. HINSON),
the sponsor of this commonsense, compassionate, and helpful bill.
b 1540
Mrs. HINSON. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the chairman for yielding time and for
his excellent work in shepherding this
bill through the Education and Workforce Committee.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to support
my bill, the Pregnant Students’ Rights
Act. This is a commonsense piece of
legislation because when Roe v. Wade
was rightfully overturned in 2022, the
next chapter of the pro-life movement
began. We were all given the opportunity to help strengthen our support
for unborn babies and for new moms.
As a mom of two, this issue is personal for me. I know that when you are
pregnant, there are about a million
questions that are going through your
head at any given time. You have the
doctors’ appointments. You have new
financial responsibilities. Pregnant
students have so much on their plate

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

as they are working to balance school
and have a healthy pregnancy at the
same time.
I think it is just unacceptable that so
often they would choose between finishing their education and having their
baby, despite the Title IX protections
that are already in place.
Under Title IX, pregnant students
have the right to stay in school and
finish their education and achieve their
career goals. However, the academic
disparity does exist because of limited
resources and support for pregnant students.
These women may fear institutional
reprisal, loss of athletic scholarships,
or even negative impacts on their academic opportunities and their standing. Those fears and anxieties are not
just unjust to women but they are a
poor reflection of how our higher education institutions treat pregnant students.
Higher education institutions and
universities have a responsibility to
empower all their students, all of
them, to succeed, including pregnant
students. They deserve to be treated
with respect and surrounded with care
and love. That is what this piece of legislation is designed to do.
I have visited pregnancy resource
centers in Iowa and met with so many
of those who have dedicated their cause
to life, many of whom have traveled
right here to Washington, D.C., for the
March for Life this weekend. It may be
a snowy March for Life this weekend.
It has been inspiring to me to see all
of the pro-life community spring into
action to really help our expecting
mothers and their babies to thrive because that is what this movement is all
about. It is about recognizing the sanctity of every life and valuing life at
every stage.
It is crucial pregnant women know
they have people standing behind
them, resources available to them, and
that they are entitled to these accommodations on campus. Completing an
education as a mother is not only empowering for the student but vital to
ensuring a strong future for her child,
for our next generation.
The Pregnant Students’ Rights Act
amends the Higher Education Act to
require our colleges and universities to
clearly distribute information about
pregnant students’ rights and available
resources through student handbooks,
emails, websites, and orientations,
while promoting accountability when
those students’ rights are violated.
It is troubling that some of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
are so dug in on their pro-abortion
stances and agenda that they would oppose providing pregnant students with
information on their rights and resources available to them to continue
their education and have a healthy
pregnancy.
Supporting women who choose life
should not be a partisan issue. Every
woman who completes her studies
while pregnant strengthens our fami-

PO 00000

Frm 00152

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

lies, our communities, and our workforce. I hope my colleagues across the
aisle will help to vote to empower pregnant students and support this vital
life-affirming legislation.
Mr. Speaker, this bill is a step in the
right direction to creating a culture of
life in our society and a step that we
must take as we continue to pursue
policies that help our families to grow
and thrive from Iowa and beyond
across the country.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentlewoman
from Georgia (Mrs. MCBATH).
Mrs. MCBATH. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the ranking member of the Education
and Workforce Committee, Mr. BOBBY
SCOTT, for yielding time.
Mr. Speaker, like so many women
across the country, I struggled for so
many years to get pregnant. My husband and I tried everything that we
could do to start a family of our own.
Being a mom for me was what I always
wanted to do. I wanted to be the best
mom that I could be.
When we finally succeeded, I remember that I had never really been so
happy. All the prayers I prayed to God,
I finally felt like my prayers were answered. The moment I prayed for, for
years, was happening. I wanted to tell
everyone that I was going to be a mom,
but one day I woke up covered in blood.
It is hard to describe the agony of a
miscarriage. It is hard to describe the
heartbreak and the utter helplessness.
You fall directly into pain and despair.
After my second miscarriage, I wondered if God ever had plans for me to be
a mom. When I got pregnant a third
time, I was completely overjoyed. At 4
months, I was rushed to the hospital
where I learned I had suffered a fetal
demise. That means a stillborn.
My doctors thought it would be safer
to end the pregnancy naturally. For 2
weeks, I carried my stillborn child
within my womb, within my belly. For
2 weeks, I carried that lost pregnancy.
For 2 weeks, I carried my dead fetus
as they waited for me to go into labor.
I never ended up going into labor on
my own. When the doctors finally induced me, I faced the pain of childbirth
without the hope for a living child.
This story is uniquely mine, but it is
not just my story. Millions of women
in our country—women in this room,
women all throughout America, women
that people here actually know and
love—have suffered a miscarriage or
stillbirth.
Congress should be making sure that
women are aware of all of their rights,
not just cherry-picking the ones that
we want to highlight over others to
make a point about abortion.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield an additional 1 minute to the
gentlewoman from Georgia.
Mrs. MCBATH. Mr. Speaker, for the
women in your life whose stories you
don’t even know, for the women across
the country whose lives you may not

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.077

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

even understand—the choices and the
environments that they live in—and
for the women in America who have
gone through things some people can
never even imagine, I ask my colleagues to vote ‘‘no’’ on this misguided
bill.
It is not that we are not trying to
empower women who are making
choices during their pregnancy. That is
not it at all. Let’s make sure that they
are empowered with every tool, every
resource, and every bit of information
they deserve to make the choices they
need to make about their lives, their
bodies, and their pregnancies.
This body should not determine what
decisions they make for themselves.
We talk about God. God gives us
choice. God gives us choice to make
the decisions that we believe are best
for ourselves. We have no right to take
those choices away from them.
Mr. Speaker, I ask every colleague on
the other side of the aisle—I have been
there. I have had to make choices.
Let’s do the right thing and make sure
that every woman has the full breadth
of the ability to make the choices that
she needs to make.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, to my
dear friend and colleague from Georgia,
as she has discussed that tragic story
with me before, my heart does break.
Having experienced that in my own
personal family, as well, I understand
what she is saying.
I am just not capable, I guess, of
communicating that this bill is affording all the questions to be answered
and all of the issue to be addressed. It
also gives pregnant women, who are
blessed to be able to continue carrying
to completion, the opportunity to also
know that their academic opportunity
will continue, as well. That is all we
are attempting to do.
My heart breaks with that story, but
my heart also says we want to make
sure—that is why I appreciate Representative HINSON’s bill—it expands
the opportunity for the information
that is given.
b 1550
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentlewoman from Illinois (Mrs. MILLER), chair of the Congressional Family Caucus and also a member of the
Education and Workforce Committee.
Mrs. MILLER of Illinois. Mr. Speaker, I rise in strong support of H.R. 6359,
the Pregnant Students’ Rights Act.
Mr. Speaker, college can be a challenging environment, especially for
pregnant women. Many feel forced to
choose between motherhood and their
education. Nearly 30 percent of all
abortions in the United States are performed on women in college.
Title IX already protects the right of
pregnant women to stay in school.
However, many of them face a lack of
resources and support. Some even fear
punishment and a loss of scholarships
simply for carrying their baby to full
term while taking classes.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1327

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

The Pregnant Students’ Rights Act
requires colleges and universities to inform pregnant women of their rights
and protections. This includes information on modified class schedules or excused absences.
This bill also requires universities to
inform pregnant women how to file a
complaint with the Department of Education if their Title IX protections are
violated. Let me be clear: No woman
should ever have to choose between finishing her education or experiencing
the joy of motherhood.
To my colleague on the other side, I
have had a similar situation also, but I
do want to thank her for acknowledging that the life within her was a
baby. Women are fully capable of raising children and getting an education
at the same time. I know because I did
it.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Congresswoman
HINSON for her leadership on the Pregnant Students’ Rights Act.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentlewoman
from Washington (Ms. RANDALL).
Ms. RANDALL. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Ranking Member SCOTT for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in strong
opposition to H.R. 6359, a bill that
claims to protect pregnant students
but actually mandates that they get
less, not more information about their
rights.
If the sponsor of this bill and the majority party actually believed in supporting student parents, then they
would take real action, not just grandstand on the House floor because the
March for Life is this weekend.
The bill before us today requires the
dissemination of incomplete information, but it also comes after House Republicans have worked alongside the
Trump regime to dismantle and weaken the Department of Education and
protections for students who file complaints around Title IX violations,
among other things.
It has dismantled subsidized loan
programs and financial aid. It has decimated Medicaid, the number one payer
for births in this country, in order to
pay for tax breaks for the ultrawealthy
and fund ICE’s violent reign in our
communities.
If we believed in supporting student
parents, we would put more money into
childcare subsidies, more money into
financial aid, and more money into
food assistance so that the women in
college, the people who are students
who get pregnant, who have a tough
decision to make, would have all of the
resources and support they need to
make the decision that is right for
them.
It is not our job to tell a student
what decision is right for them. It is
not our job to tell any high school
graduate that they need to go to college, right? I hear Republicans say that
all the time. I tend to agree. I believe
that students deserve all of the options

PO 00000

Frm 00153

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

and all of the support to make the
choice that is right for them.
Yet mandating incomplete information while gutting the programs that
would allow a pregnant student to
choose to stay pregnant and to choose
to complete school is a fallacy. It is political theater, and it is doing a disservice to the students who we are purporting to support.
I have had a chance to work with a
lot of students who have become pregnant, both from around the time I was
in junior high, when a friend of mine
had a pregnancy scare, to a time when
I was in college, to being a volunteer in
the bay area where I was on a rapid response line in case someone needed to
take a bus 31⁄2 hours from their college
campus into the city. That is because
that was the only place they could access either maternity care, OB/GYN
care, or access abortion care. We have
not funded healthcare in rural communities across the country. We have gutted programs that provide actual support for pregnant people.
This is a joke. This let’s make sure
they get an email with all of the information. It is unserious.
Mr. Speaker, I urge all of my colleagues to vote ‘‘no’’ on this bill and to
take serious action to support students, pregnant or not.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I will make a few factual comments in response and also
provide some information relative to
my colleague’s previous comments.
Republicans just passed working families tax cuts, which gave American
families the largest tax cut in American history. Under the bill, the typical
family will get up to $10,900 in additional take-home pay. Households
earning less than $100,000 will get a 12
percent tax cut compared to July 2025.
Equally as important, if not more so,
the child tax credit will double to $2,200
for more than 40 million American
families.
That is taking into consideration the
children that come from pregnancy
who are born. We are not leaving them
without resources. The working families tax cuts promotes life by putting
hardworking families first, ensuring
that they keep their hard-earned
money in their pockets for their necessary uses.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself such time as I may consume. First, I suggest that that big,
ugly bill gave tax cuts primarily to the
wealthy, but, meanwhile, it cut
healthcare, Medicaid, SNAP benefits,
and ran up trillions of dollars in additional debt.
Mr. Speaker, I include in the RECORD
a letter from over 50 organizations representing civil rights, labor organizations,
youth
advocates,
women’s
rights, reproductive rights, and others.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.079

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1328

JANUARY 20, 2026.
Hon. MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
Hon. HAKEEM JEFFRIES,
Minority Leader, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
DEAR SPEAKER JOHNSON AND LEADER
JEFFRIES: We, the undersigned organizations,
represent a diverse group of advocates and
experts dedicated to advancing civil rights
protections and institutional resources for
pregnant and parenting students. We write
to share our opposition to the Pregnant Students’ Rights Act—a thinly veiled anti-abortion law which would not address the key
barriers to pregnant students’ educational
attainment, but would instead further shame
and stigmatize people for their pregnancy
outcomes.
This bill that purports to ‘‘protect the
rights of pregnant students’’ falls far short
of the protections that are actually necessary for pregnant and parenting students
and their children.
More than 3 million undergraduate students in the United States are parents,
which is nearly one in five. Despite earning
higher GPAs than non-parenting students,
parenting college students are less likely to
graduate. This is not due to personal failing,
but rather a lack of institutional support
and recognition of the unique barriers to college completion for parenting students.
Pregnant and parenting students often experience feeling disconnected from the larger
education community and are not aware of
who they can speak to when they experience
discrimination because of their pregnancy or
parenting status.
Students who are pregnant and/or parents
deserve to complete their education free
from bias and harassment, in environments
that support them on their educational journeys. Unfortunately, pregnant and parenting
students are routinely stigmatized, discriminated against, and denied the resources, accommodations, and support they need to
thrive in their educational institutions.
Many pregnant students risk their health or
the health of their pregnancies, because they
are unaware of their right to accommodations, including leaves of absence, lactation
accommodations, academic adjustments—including virtual learning and extensions on
completing assignments—financial aid eligibility, and child care. Ensuring that students
are informed about their educational institution’s policies that can further their academic achievement while also supporting
their health and caregiving needs is an important step in addressing the systemic barriers that can keep pregnant and parenting
students from graduating.
Unfortunately, the proposed bill would do
little to mitigate these harms and instead
risks further stigmatizing pregnant and parenting students. The proposed bill relies on
anti-abortion language and seeks to limit
students’ reproductive healthcare decisions.
This language is part of a political ploy that
the anti-abortion movement hopes to use to
further its case for a national abortion ban
now that the Supreme Court has overturned
the federal constitutional right to abortion
care as established in Roe v. Wade. Furthermore, the bill language undermines existing
legal protections under Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX) for
pregnant students experiencing a range of
outcomes related to their pregnancies.
Our belief in personal autonomy and respect for every person’s capacity to make
their own decisions—including whether to
continue their pregnancy or not—is at the
core of our work to support pregnant and
parenting students. This bill does not contain any meaningful supports that would ac-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

tually help pregnant and parenting students
be able to remain enrolled and meet their
educational goals.
Such supports are critically needed, and
include:
Explicit protections under Title IX
Nondiscrimination protections at the state
and local level
Accessible and affordable child care, and
increased funding for on-campus child care
Access to early education and pre-kindergarten services
Transportation access
Support for basic needs, including food,
housing, clothing, etc.
Flexible school attendance policies
Lactation accommodations
Less stigma and shame around young parenthood
Increased accountability measures for institutions who fail to protect pregnant and
parenting students
Federal funding to support campus Title
IX offices’ work to prevent and investigate
discrimination against pregnant students
Mandatory data collection on student parents to help institutions better target supports and meet the unique needs of this population
As mentioned above, pregnant and parenting students do face stigma and need adequate resources to combat discrimination.
However, the Pregnant Students’ Rights Act
contains little more than a hollow directive
for these students to file complaints with the
Department of Education, which the Trump
Administration has been systematically
decimating since taking office, even promising to dismantle the agency. A series of Executive Orders issued early in 2025 substantially impacted the Department’s enforcement of civil rights laws, by prioritizing
weaponizing these laws to advance discrimination instead of protecting students, including pregnant and parenting students.
Education Secretary Linda McMahon fired
nearly half of Department staff—with the Office for Civil Rights (OCR), which is responsible for ensuring schools comply with federal civil rights laws, being particularly impacted. And Secretary McMahon also closed
most of OCR’s twelve regional offices that
have responsibility to investigate alleged
violations of civil rights laws. Directing
pregnant students to an institution that has
been gutted by the current Administration is
little more than lip service.
There is an alternate path forward. We applaud the bipartisan legislation put forward
by Representatives Lucy McBath, Deborah
Ross, and Don Bacon: the Understanding Student Parent Outcomes Act of 2025. This bill
would make a meaningful difference by allowing essential data collection on the barriers to college graduation for pregnant and
parenting students. Legislation like this is
necessary to ensure that pregnant and parenting students can complete their education and that they and their families are
protected.
Although pregnant and parenting students
face many roadblocks, they can thrive when
their educational institutions listen to them,
support them, and prevent discrimination
against them, While balancing their health,
caregiving responsibilities, and educational
goals is challenging, these added responsibilities often renew students’ dedication to
their studies. While the decision to parent
and/or continue pregnancy is a personal one,
the barriers that pregnant and parenting
students face are not. This proposed bill
would reinforce structural and institutional
bias and scrutiny of the decisions students
make regarding their personal lives.
We welcome the opportunity to have an
open dialogue with the sponsors of the
‘‘Pregnant Students’ Rights Act’’ and with

PO 00000

Frm 00154

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

any other members of Congress who are
ready to be the champion that pregnant and
parenting students in our nation need and
deserve.
Sincerely,
Advocates for Youth, AFT, AFL-CIO, All*
in Action Fund, American Association of
University Women (AAUW), American Atheists, American Civil Liberties Union, American Humanist Association, Center for Reproductive Rights, Clearinghouse on Women’s Issues, End Rape On Campus, Equal
Rights Advocates, Feminist Majority, Girls
for Gender Equity, Guttmacher Institute,
Healthy Teen Network, Ibis Reproductive
Health, Just Solutions, Justice and Joy National Collaborative, Know Your IX, Legal
Momentum, the Women’s Legal Defense &
Education Fund.
MANA, A National Latina Organization,
MomsRising, National Council of Jewish
Women, National Education Association, National Family Planning & Reproductive
Health Association, National Institute for
Reproductive Health, National Latina Institute for Reproductive Justice, National Network of Abortion Funds, National Organization for Women, National Organization of
API Ending Sexual Violence, National Partnership for Women & Families, National
Women’s Law Center Action Fund, National
Women’s Political Caucus, New America
Higher Education Policy Program, Physicians for Reproductive Health, Planned Parenthood Federation of America, Positive
Women’s Network-USA, Power to Decide,
Public Justice, Reproaction.
Reproductive Freedom for All, Rocky
Mountain Victim Law Center, SIECUS: Sex
Ed for Social Change, Stop Sexual Assault in
Schools, Tahirih Justice Center, The Pregnant Scholar at WorkLife Law, Transgender
Law Center, UltraViolet Action, Union for
Reform Judaism, University Survivors Movement, Women Employed, Women of Reform
Judaism, Women’s Law Project.

Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
they describe the Pregnant Students’
Rights Act as: ‘‘a thinly veiled antiabortion law which would not address
key barriers to pregnant students’ educational attainment, but would instead
further shame and stigmatize people
for their pregnancy outcomes.’’
They further say: ‘‘This bill that purports to ‘protect the rights of pregnant
students’ falls far short of the protections that are actually necessary for
pregnant and parenting students and
their children.’’
It points out that if you really want
to be serious, there are some things
that we could actually do to support
the students, such as: explicit protections under Title IX; nondiscrimination protections at the State and local
level;
accessible
and
affordable
childcare; access to early childhood
education and pre-kindergarten services; transportation services; and others that would actually make a difference.
Mr. Speaker, we have constantly
heard that they are providing comprehensive information and not amending Title IX. The fact is that Title IX
does have comprehensive rights that
are listed under Title IX that are comprehensive.
This bill, however, only requires partial information about those rights.
When only partial information is given,
that could have fatal consequences to

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.023

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

women. Tragically, women have died
because of anti-abortion legislation
that was passed in some States that require women to be close to death before
they can have what could have been a
safe abortion if performed earlier. If
they mistime it and get closer to death
than they thought, many have actually
died in those circumstances.
Legislators voted for those laws. We
have to note that we should not allow
colleges to withhold information that
could save women’s lives.
Mr. Speaker, I would hope that this
bill would not pass under that situation, and I reserve the balance of my
time.
b 1600
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I include in the RECORD a list of significant pro-family, pro-life medical community members, family research
members, and students in support of
the Pregnant Students’ Rights Act.
ORGANIZATIONS THAT SUPPORT H.R. 6359, THE
PREGNANT STUDENTS’ RIGHTS ACT

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America
Students for Life Action
National Right to Life Committee
Iowa Right to Life
Concerned Women for America
American Association of Pro-life Obstetricians and Gynecologists (AAPLOG) Action
Heritage Action
Independent Women
Center for Urban Renewal (CURE)
Eagle Forum
Family Research Council

Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield 3 minutes to the gentlewoman
from Oregon (Ms. BONAMICI).
Ms. BONAMICI. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Ranking Member SCOTT for his leadership and for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, I oppose this bill because, among other reasons, the information that is required is incomplete
and biased.
As written, the Pregnant Students’
Rights Act is unfairly limited regarding the information it requires colleges
to provide to students and the students
it chooses to support. It does not include information about comprehensive family planning resources, and it
only supports pregnant students who
carry a baby to term.
Simply put, the bill fails to support
any student with a different pregnancy-related outcome.
I, like my colleague from Georgia,
had a wanted pregnancy. I was past the
first trimester when I had an
ultrasound, and the doctor said this
was not viable, not a viable pregnancy,
so they sent me to the hospital to have
a procedure.
My colleagues might think that is
terrible, but had I been in a post-Dobbs
world or a State where that wasn’t possible, I could have just been made to
wait and risk my reproductive health. I
went on to have two healthy children
because I had that procedure.
The intent of this bill is clear, Mr.
Speaker. It is clear from the text. It is

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1329

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

clear from the debate. It is certainly
clear from the timing. It is another attempt to have politicians interfere in
the intensely personal decision of when
and whether to have a child, a decision
that should be made only by the pregnant student, not by Members of Congress.
In the wake of Dobbs, many States
have prohibited or tried to prohibit
healthcare providers and health plans
from offering or covering certain reproductive healthcare services. These
anti-abortion efforts have disproportionately harmed some students whose
access to services and information is
affected by their geographical barriers,
depending on where they are in college.
Pregnant and parenting students deserve access to a full range of family
planning resources and reproductive
healthcare options that keep them
healthy and on track for academic success, regardless of where they go to college.
For this reason, Mr. Speaker, at the
appropriate time, I will offer a motion
to recommit this bill back to the committee. If the House rules permitted, I
would have offered the motion with an
important amendment to this bill.
My amendment would make clear
that institutions of higher education
will also provide medically accurate
and comprehensive information and resources
about
all
reproductive
healthcare services, including contraception and abortion rights.
The biased, anti-choice effort underpinning this bill will make it harder for
students to make informed decisions
about what is best for them. Promoting
partisan legislation that fails to address the full healthcare needs of students does not promote academic success.
Again, Mr. Speaker, this is a decision
that belongs to the pregnant student,
not to Members of Congress.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to insert into the RECORD the text
of this amendment immediately prior
to the motion to recommit.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Oregon?
There was no objection.
Ms. BONAMICI. Mr. Speaker, I hope
my colleagues will join me in voting
for the motion to recommit.
Mr. WALBERG. I am prepared to
close, Mr. Speaker, and I reserve the
balance of my time.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I yield myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, in closing, since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade,
State abortion bans have undermined
healthcare for pregnant women, causing women to experience life-threatening health conditions and complications, with some women tragically losing their lives because of laws that legislators voted for.
Now, House Republicans are going to
make things worse by limiting students’ access to information about
available resources, including informa-

PO 00000

Frm 00155

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

tion about their right to receive accommodations and protections under
Federal civil rights laws available to
pregnant or parenting students on college campuses. Women should have access to all relevant information so they
can make informed decisions about
their futures.
By requiring schools to provide only
some information that encourages students to carry a pregnancy to term,
this bill could unduly endanger students’ health by keeping them in the
dark about their rights and resources
available to them.
The supporters keep saying that they
are not amending Title IX, which entitles students to all of this information.
They keep ignoring the fact that this
bill only requires that some, not all, of
that important information be provided. Repeating a misrepresentation
does not make it true.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
oppose the bill, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Speaker, I yield
myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, in closing, I would like
to reemphasize that this bill is about
ensuring pregnant students know the
rights given to them under Title IX,
which cover all the concerns that my
colleagues, with all due respect, on the
other side of the aisle say they want
included. Title IX includes all of that.
We want students to know the rights
given to them under Title IX without
creating excessive regulations or requirements for colleges and universities.
Despite what some of my colleagues
have said today, the Pregnant Students’ Rights Act doesn’t promote a
certain viewpoint or ideology. It simply affirms a basic principle, and that
principle is that pregnant students deserve to know their rights when pursuing an education.
I don’t believe that to be too radical,
Mr. Speaker, and I don’t believe the
American people do either. In fact, for
years, many of my Democratic colleagues acknowledged that abortion is
a serious and difficult decision and supported efforts to ensure women were
not forced into it by a lack of resources
or support. They joined in passing legislation to help women who choose to
continue their pregnancies. Yet, today,
some of those efforts are being undermined unless amendments that explicitly promote abortion are included.
It is deeply disappointing that some
of my Democratic colleagues have chosen to turn this straightforward transparency bill into an abortion debate,
implying that support for pregnant
students is contingent on including
pro-abortion provisions. Why must an
innocent baby ever be seen as an
enemy or obstacle to success?
This bill also does not provide medical advice or dictate what specific resources colleges and universities may
list. For that reason, I would encourage those who oppose this legislation
on those grounds to carefully re-read

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.081

H22JAPT1

H1330

the bill’s plain language. We all know
that when individuals know their
rights, they are able to make informed
decisions that are best for them, their
families, and their futures.
Mr. Speaker, this is why I urge all of
my colleagues to vote ‘‘yes,’’ and I
yield back the balance of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. All time
for debate has expired.
Pursuant to House Resolution 1009,
the previous question is ordered on the
bill, as amended.
The question is on the engrossment
and third reading of the bill.
The bill was ordered to be engrossed
and read a third time, and was read the
third time.
MOTION TO RECOMMIT

Ms. BONAMICI. Mr. Speaker, I have
a motion to recommit at the desk.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Clerk will report the motion to recommit.
The Clerk read as follows:
Ms. Bonamici of Oregon moves to recommit the bill H.R. 6359 to the Committee on
Education and Workforce.

The material previously referred to
by Ms. BONAMICI is as follows:
Ms. Bonamici of Oregon moves to recommit the bill H.R. 6359 to the Committee on
Education and Workforce with instructions
to report the same back to the House forthwith, with the following amendment:
Page 5, line 13, strike the quotation mark
and period at the end.
Page 5, after line 13, insert the following:
‘‘(5) ADDITIONAL RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed
to prevent an institution of higher education
from providing medically accurate and comprehensive information and resources about
sexual and reproductive health services, including information and resources related to
contraception and abortion, to prospective
and enrolled students.’’.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 2(b) of rule XIX, the previous question is ordered on the motion
to recommit.
The question is on the motion to recommit.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the noes appeared to have it.
Ms. BONAMICI. Mr. Speaker, on that
I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question will be postponed.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

b 1610
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on passage of
the bill (H.R. 7147) making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes, on which the yeas and
nays were ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the passage of the bill.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 220, nays
207, not voting 4, as follows:
[Roll No. 42]
YEAS—220
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Cuellar
Davidson
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino

Gill (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gonzalez, V.
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller-Meeks
Mills

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley

Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)

Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Murphy
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perez
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Suozzi
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—207

PO 00000

Frm 00156

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene

Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer

Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Massie
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin

Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—4
Harris (MD)
Hunt

McClintock
Miller (WV)

b 1641
Mr. GOLDMAN of New York changed
his vote from ‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’
Ms. STEFANIK changed her vote
from ‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the bill was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
Stated for:
Mrs. MILLER of West Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
I was still on committee—detained. Had I been
present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call
No. 42.
f

CONSOLIDATED APPROPRIATIONS
ACT, 2026
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
DESJARLAIS). Pursuant to House Resolution 1014 and rule XVIII, the Chair
declares the House in the Committee of
the Whole House on the state of the
Union for the further consideration of
the bill, H.R. 7148.
Will the gentleman from Florida (Mr.
FINE) kindly take the chair.
b 1642
IN THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

Accordingly, the House resolved
itself into the Committee of the Whole

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.084

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

House on the state of the Union for the
further consideration of the bill (H.R.
7148) making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes, with Mr. FINE in the chair.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The Acting CHAIR. When the Committee of the Whole rose earlier today,
a request for a recorded vote on amendment No. 2, printed in part B of House
Report 119–462, offered by the gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. NORMAN) had been postponed.
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE ACTING CHAIR

The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to
clause 6 of rule XVIII, proceedings will
now resume on those amendments
printed in part B of House Report 119–
462 on which further proceedings were
postponed, in the following order:
Amendment No. 1 by Mr. MASSIE of
Kentucky.
Amendment No. 2 by Mr. NORMAN of
South Carolina.
The Chair will reduce to 2 minutes
the minimum time for any electronic
vote after the first vote in this series.
AMENDMENT NO. 1 OFFERED BY MR. MASSIE

The Acting CHAIR. The unfinished
business is the demand for a recorded
vote on amendment No. 1, printed in
part B of House Report 119–462, offered
by the gentleman from Kentucky (Mr.
MASSIE), on which further proceedings
were postponed and on which the ayes
prevailed by voice vote.
The Clerk will redesignate the
amendment.
The Clerk redesignated the amendment.
RECORDED VOTE

The Acting CHAIR. A recorded vote
has been demanded.
A recorded vote was ordered.
The Acting CHAIR. This will be a 2minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—ayes 164, noes 268,
not voting 4, as follows:

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

[Roll No. 43]
AYES—164
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Arrington
Babin
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Boebert
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Collins
Comer

Correa
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Donalds
Downing
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Flood
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Gill (TX)
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:13 Jan 23, 2026

H1331

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hinson
Houchin
Hoyle (OR)
Hudson
Huizenga
Issa
Jackson (TX)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (PA)
Kaptur
Kelly (MS)
Kennedy (UT)
Knott
Kustoff
Langworthy
Latta
Lee (FL)
Letlow

Jkt 069060

Loudermilk
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Mann
Massie
McCaul
McClain
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Miller (IL)
Miller (WV)
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Norman
Obernolte
Ogles

Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perez
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Amodei (NV)
Ansari
Auchincloss
Bacon
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bice
Bilirakis
Bishop
Bonamici
Bost
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Calvert
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Cole
Conaway
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Feenstra
Fields
Figures

Fine
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Fletcher
Fong
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Hill (AR)
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Huffman
Hurd (CO)
Ivey
Jack
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
James
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Joyce (OH)
Kamlager-Dove
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
King-Hinds
Krishnamoorthi
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lawler
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lucas
Lynch

Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Tiffany
Timmons
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Yakym

NOES—268

PO 00000

Frm 00157

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mannion
Mast
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Meuser
Mfume
Miller (OH)
Miller-Meeks
Min
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Moylan
Mrvan
Mullin
Murphy
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Newhouse
Norcross
Norton
Nunn (IA)
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Plaskett
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (KY)
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier

Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Simpson
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stefanik
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell

Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Valadao

Van Orden
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)
Wittman
Womack
Zinke

NOT VOTING—4
Hernández
Hunt

McClintock
Radewagen

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE ACTING CHAIR

The Acting CHAIR (during the vote).
There is 1 minute remaining.
b 1647
Mr. JAMES changed his vote from
‘‘aye’’ to ‘‘no.’’
Mr. FLOOD changed his vote from
‘‘no’’ to ‘‘aye.’’
So the amendment was rejected.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
AMENDMENT NO. 2 OFFERED BY MR. NORMAN

The Acting CHAIR. The unfinished
business is the demand for a recorded
vote on amendment No. 2, printed in
part B of House Report 119–462, offered
by the gentleman from South Carolina
(Mr. NORMAN), on which further proceedings were postponed and on which
the ayes prevailed by voice vote.
The Clerk will redesignate the
amendment.
The Clerk redesignated the amendment.
RECORDED VOTE

The Acting CHAIR. A recorded vote
has been demanded.
A recorded vote was ordered.
The Acting CHAIR. This will be a 2minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—ayes 136, noes 291,
not voting 9, as follows:
[Roll No. 44]
AYES—136
Allen
Arrington
Babin
Baird
Balderson
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Brecheen
Burchett
Burlison
Cammack
Carter (GA)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.090

H22JAPT1

Donalds
Downing
Estes
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Gill (TX)
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Grothman
Guest
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)

Higgins (LA)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Jack
Jackson (TX)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (PA)
Kelly (MS)
Kennedy (UT)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
Langworthy
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Luna
Mace
Mackenzie
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McCormick
McDowell
Messmer
Miller (IL)

H1332
Rulli
Rutherford
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Steil
Steube
Stutzman

Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Alford
Amo
Amodei (NV)
Ansari
Auchincloss
Bacon
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Bergman
Beyer
Bice
Bishop
Bonamici
Bost
Boyle (PA)
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Bynum
Calvert
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Cole
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crawford
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures

Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Fletcher
Flood
Fong
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Graves
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Griffith
Grijalva
Guthrie
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Hill (AR)
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
James
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Joyce (OH)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
King-Hinds
Krishnamoorthi
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Latta
Lawler
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lucas
Luttrell
Lynch
Magaziner
Malliotakis

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:26 Jan 23, 2026

Taylor
Tiffany
Timmons
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Wagner
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Yakym
Zinke

Simpson
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stauber
Stefanik
Stevens
Strickland
Strong
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Tenney

Maloy
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Meuser
Mfume
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Min
Moolenaar
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Moylan
Mrvan
Mullin
Murphy
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Newhouse
Norcross
Norton
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Owens
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Plaskett
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Reschenthaler
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon

Barr
Emmer
Hernández

NOES—291

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Mills
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Nehls
Norman
Ogles
Onder
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Rose
Rouzer
Roy

Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Orden

Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walberg
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)
Wittman
Womack

NOT VOTING—9

Jkt 069060

Hunt
McClintock
McGuire

Radewagen
Salazar
Scalise

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE ACTING CHAIR

The Acting CHAIR (during the vote).
There is 1 minute remaining.
b 1651
So the amendment was rejected.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The Acting CHAIR. There being no
further amendments under the rule,
the Committee rises.
Accordingly, the Committee rose;
and the Speaker pro tempore (Mr.
FINE) having assumed the chair, Mr.
THOMPSON of Pennsylvania, Acting
Chair of the Committee of the Whole
House on the state of the Union, reported that that Committee, having
had under consideration the bill (H.R.
7148) making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 2026, and for other purposes, and, pursuant to House Resolution 1014, he reported the bill, as
amended by that resolution, back to
the House.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Under
the rule, the previous question is ordered.
The question is on the engrossment
and third reading of the bill.
The bill was ordered to be engrossed
and read a third time, and was read the
third time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the passage of the bill.
Under clause 10 of rule XX, the yeas
and nays are ordered.
Members will record their votes by
electronic device.
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 9 of rule XX, this 5minute vote on:
Passage of H.R. 7148 will be followed
by 2-minute votes on:
The motion to recommit H.R. 6359;
Passage of H.R. 6359, if ordered; and
Adoption of H. Con. Res. 68.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 341, nays 88,
not voting 2, as follows:
[Roll No. 45]
YEAS—341
Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Alford
Allen
Amo

PO 00000

Frm 00158

Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Auchincloss
Babin
Bacon
Baird

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Balderson
Barr
Barragán
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)

Beatty
Begich
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Bishop
Bost
Bresnahan
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Bynum
Calvert
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (GA)
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Ciscomani
Clark (MA)
Cleaver
Cline
Cloud
Clyburn
Clyde
Cohen
Cole
Collins
Comer
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davidson
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
Dean (PA)
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Emmer
Escobar
Estes
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fields
Figures
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foster
Foxx
Frankel, Lois
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.027

H22JAPT1

Gonzalez, V.
Gooden
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Graves
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harshbarger
Hayes
Hern (OK)
Hill (AR)
Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houchin
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jack
Jackson (IL)
Jackson (TX)
James
Jeffries
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Krishnamoorthi
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Langworthy
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Lee (NV)
Leger Fernandez
Letlow
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luttrell
Lynch
Mace
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mannion
Mast
McBath
McBride
McCaul
McClain
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McCormick
McDonald Rivet
McDowell
McGuire
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Messmer

Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Mrvan
Mullin
Murphy
Nadler
Neal
Nehls
Newhouse
Norcross
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Olszewski
Onder
Owens
Pallone
Palmer
Panetta
Pappas
Patronis
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pfluger
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Quigley
Raskin
Reschenthaler
Riley (NY)
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Ross
Rouzer
Ruiz
Rulli
Rutherford
Ryan
Salazar
Sánchez
Scalise
Schakowsky
Schmidt
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, Austin
Scott, David
Sessions
Sewell
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smith (WA)
Smucker
Sorensen
Soto
Stanton
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Stevens
Strickland
Strong
Stutzman
Suozzi
Sykes
Takano
Taylor
Tenney
Thanedar
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Titus
Tokuda
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran

January 22, 2026
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Vasquez
Veasey
Vindman
Wagner

Walberg
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Whitesides

Ansari
Balint
Beyer
Biggs (AZ)
Boebert
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brecheen
Brown
Burchett
Burlison
Cammack
Casar
Castro (TX)
Cisneros
Clarke (NY)
Craig
Crane
DeGette
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Doggett
Donalds
Espaillat
Fine
Fletcher
Foushee
Friedman
Frost
Garcia (CA)

Garcı́a (IL)
Gill (TX)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gosar
Grijalva
Harris (NC)
Higgins (LA)
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Jacobs
Jayapal
Johnson (GA)
Kamlager-Dove
Kennedy (UT)
Khanna
Lee (PA)
Lofgren
Luna
Massie
Matsui
McGarvey
McGovern
Meng
Mfume
Mills
Min
Moore (WI)
Moulton
Neguse

NAYS—88
Ocasio-Cortez
Ogles
Omar
Perry
Pettersen
Pressley
Ramirez
Randall
Rivas
Roy
Salinas
Scanlon
Schweikert
Self
Sherman
Simon
Spartz
Stansbury
Steube
Subramanyam
Swalwell
Thompson (CA)
Tlaib
Tonko
Underwood
Vargas
Velázquez
Williams (GA)

NOT VOTING—2
Hunt

McClintock
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO
TEMPORE.

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There are 2 minutes remaining.
b 1658
So the bill was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1333

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (FL)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

PREGNANT STUDENTS’ RIGHTS
ACT
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
BOST). Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX,
the unfinished business is the vote on
the motion to recommit on the bill
(H.R. 6359) to require institutions of
higher education to disseminate information on the rights of, and accommodations and resources for, pregnant
students, and for other purposes, offered by the gentlewoman from Oregon
(Ms. BONAMICI), on which the yeas and
nays were ordered.
The Clerk will redesignate the motion.
The Clerk redesignated the motion.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion to recommit.
This will be a 2-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 213, nays
216, not voting 2, as follows:
[Roll No. 46]
YEAS—213
Adams
Aguilar
Amo

Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint

Barragán
Beatty
Bell

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:26 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer

Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone

Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert

Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell

Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NAYS—216

PO 00000

Frm 00159

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman

Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace

Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Murphy
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli

Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NOT VOTING—2
Hunt

McClintock

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There is 1 minute remaining.
b 1704
Messrs. LANGWORTHY and FLOOD
changed their vote from ‘‘yea’’ to
‘‘nay.’’
Ms. LEE of Nevada and Mr. MIN
changed their vote from ‘‘nay’’ to
‘‘yea.’’
So the motion to recommit was rejected.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the passage of the bill.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Mr. SCOTT of Virginia. Mr. Speaker,
on that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
2-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 217, nays
211, not voting 3, as follows:
[Roll No. 47]
YEAS—217
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.028

H22JAPT1

Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan

Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde

H1334
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Murphy
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway

Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)

Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

NAYS—211

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Cuellar
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson

07:26 Jan 23, 2026

Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez

Jkt 069060

Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski

Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen

Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—3
Hunt

Kaptur

McClintock

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There is 1 minute remaining.
b 1707
Mr. ONDER changed his vote from
‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the bill was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

REMOVAL OF THE USE OF UNITED
STATES
FORCES
FOR
HOSTILITIES WITHIN OR AGAINST
VENEZUELA
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on adoption
of the concurrent resolution (H. Con.
Res. 68) to direct the removal of United
States Armed Forces from Venezuela
that have not been authorized by Congress, on which the yeas and nays were
ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the concurrent resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the concurrent resolution.
This is a 2-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 215, nays
215, not voting 1, as follows:
[Roll No. 48]
YEAS—215
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Bacon
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera

PO 00000

Frm 00160

Beyer
Bishop
Bonamici
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)

Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Garcia (TX)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Gonzalez, V.
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jackson (IL)
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries

Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Massie
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan

Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Baird
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde

Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Crenshaw
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher

Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NAYS—215

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.033

H22JAPT1

Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hunt
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan

January 22, 2026
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)

Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Valadao
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NOT VOTING—1
McClintock
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE

The SPEAKER pro tempore (during
the vote). There is 1 minute remaining.
b 1733
So the concurrent resolution was not
agreed to.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

SUBMISSION OF MATERIAL EXPLANATORY
REGARDING
H.R.
7148, CONSOLIDATED APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026; AND H.R. 7147,
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026
Pursuant to section 3 of House Resolution 1014, the chair of the Committee
on Appropriations submitted explanatory material relating to H.R. 7148 and
H.R. 7147.
The contents of this submission will
be published in Book II of the RECORD.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

DIRECTING THE CLERK OF THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
TO MAKE A CORRECTION IN THE
ENGROSSMENT OF H.R. 7147
Mr. CISCOMANI. Mr. Speaker, I send
to the desk a resolution and ask for its
immediate consideration.
The Clerk read the title of the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Arizona?
There was no objection.
The text of the resolution is as follows:
H. RES. 1016
Resolved, That the Clerk of the House of
Representatives shall, in the engrossment of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:26 Jan 23, 2026

H1335

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Murphy
Nehls
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions

Jkt 069060

the bill H.R. 7147, make the following correction: In section 230(b), strike ‘‘in this Act or
any other act’’ and insert ‘‘for the Department of Homeland Security in this or any
prior Act’’; and such correction shall be incorporated in the engrossment of H.R. 7148
pursuant to House Resolution 1014.

The resolution was agreed to.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

COMMUNICATION
FROM
THE
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES
The SPEAKER pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from the Speaker of the House
of Representatives:
WASHINGTON, DC,
January 22, 2026.
I hereby designate the period from Thursday, January 22, 2026, through Sunday, February 1, 2026, as a ‘‘district work period’’
under clause 13 of Rule I.
MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
f

FARM SHOW CENTENNIAL AWARD
(Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to celebrate
two families that were awarded Century Farm status at the Pennsylvania
Farm Show last week.
Agriculture has a long history in the
Commonwealth and has been one of the
State’s first industries. For the prosperity of the State, it is important to
preserve these farms and pass them to
the next generation.
Pennsylvania leads the Nation in the
number of preserved farms, and the
Century and Bicentennial Farm programs recognize the commitment and
hard work that these families have endured to keep their farms in production.
This year, two families from Pennsylvania’s 15th Congressional District
were presented with the Century Farm
status.
Jeremiah Keck is a resident of
DuBois, and the Keck Family Farm
dates back to 1860. Their farm and barn
were built in 1931 and are still used.
Some historical photos of their farm
are preserved in the Library of Congress. Their farm is one of the 40 Century Farms in Clearfield County.
Scott and Cheryl Kinter, from
Smicksburg, have farmed almost 100
acres of land since 1867. Indiana County
has 56 Century Farms.
Mr. Speaker, I thank these families
for their hard work and their dedication to the agriculture industry.
f

CELEBRATING HELEN MORAGA ON
HER 100TH BIRTHDAY
(Mr. CORREA asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute.)
Mr. CORREA. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to celebrate my neighbor, Helen
Moraga’s, 100th birthday.

PO 00000

Frm 00161

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Helen graduated in 1945 from Santa
Ana High School. After graduating, she
played shortstop on an all-female professional baseball team in Orange
County.
Later, Helen married Frank Gomez
Moraga, a fellow Orange County resident, and they raised their three sons
in the same neighborhood they grew up
in.
Helen and Frank were married for 60
years and shared 12 grandchildren and
11 great-grandchildren.
At 100 years young, Helen loves reading, gardening, and spending time with
her friends and family.
Mr. Speaker, I wish Helen a happy
birthday.
Go Saints.
f

b 1740
ROE V. WADE ANNIVERSARY
(Mr. BIGGS of Arizona asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. BIGGS of Arizona. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today on the 43rd anniversary of
the devastating Roe v. Wade decision.
For nearly 50 years, Roe distorted our
Constitution and did great harm to our
Nation.
The decision was not rooted in the
text of the Constitution. Instead, the
Court invented a constitutional right
grounded in a vague, undefined concept
of privacy that the Court itself struggled to explain.
Roe silenced voters, sidelined legislatures, and eroded respect for the judiciary by turning judges into policymakers. Worst of all, it cost millions of
innocent lives.
In overturning Roe, the Supreme
Court rightly corrected a grave legal
error and returned authority to the
States where it belongs. That restoration of constitutional order was long
overdue.
I also bid hello and welcome to my
friends from the Center for Arizona
Policy who are in the gallery today.
f

HONORING TERRI DENISON ON
HER RETIREMENT
(Mrs. MCBATH asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Mrs. MCBATH. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize Ms. Terri Denison
as she retires from an outstanding career as Georgia district director of the
Small Business Administration.
Since 2002, Terri has been a steadfast
advocate for small businesses and entrepreneurs, ensuring that they have
the resources and guidance needed to
grow and succeed.
Terri’s leadership was especially
vital during times of economic uncertainty. Throughout the COVID–19 pandemic, she was instrumental in helping
Georgia’s small businesses navigate unprecedented challenges. Terri worked

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.029

H22JAPT1

H1336

tirelessly to connect businessowners
with relief programs, which provided
stability and hope in the midst of crisis.
I offer my deepest gratitude to Terri
for her devotion to Georgia’s entrepreneurial community, and I celebrate her
extraordinary
accomplishments
in
service to this country. Through the
years, she has always been willing to
serve the people of Georgia, and I have
enjoyed working with her through
many events for small business stakeholders in my district.
On behalf of my office, Georgia’s
Sixth Congressional District, and the
United States House of Representatives, I congratulate and offer best
wishes to Terri on her retirement.
f

REMEMBERING OLIVER ‘‘OLLIE’’
JENKINS
(Mr. LAWLER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
honor the life of Oliver ‘‘Ollie’’ Jenkins, a proud Bronx native whose presence left a lasting mark on his family
and community.
Born and raised in the Bronx, Ollie
came from a close-knit, hardworking
family whose small businesses were fixtures in their neighborhood. Those values stayed with him throughout his
life.
In 1971, Ollie answered the call to
serve our country, enlisting in the
United States Army and serving honorably, including time stationed in Germany. Like too many veterans, he
later carried the invisible wounds of
service, facing PTSD with courage and
the steadfast support of those who
loved him.
Ollie was gentle, kind, and unforgettable, known for his laugh, his jokes,
his love of karate and Bruce Lee, and
for proudly representing the Bronx everywhere he went. He was a devoted father and grandfather; a loyal brother,
uncle, and neighbor; and a familiar, beloved presence in our community.
Ollie leaves behind a family who
cherished him deeply, especially his
daughter, Colby, and a legacy built in
love, perseverance, and deep faith. May
his memory be a blessing to all who
knew him.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

RECOGNIZING THE REMEDY
CHURCH
(Mrs. SYKES asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Mrs. SYKES. Mr. Speaker, today, I
rise to recognize The Remedy Church
and its congregation as Ohio’s 13th
Congressional District’s Champion of
the Week.
This past weekend marked a significant milestone as The Remedy Church
celebrated 5 years of faithful service to
God and community. Under the leader-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:26 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

ship of Pastor Deante Lavender and
Arnalesa
Lavender,
affectionately
known as Pastor Lav and Pastor Lesa,
The Remedy Church is dedicated to
welcoming everyone from our community with open arms.
They are guided by the motto, Love
Christ, Love People, Build Community,
and the mission to ‘‘teach Christ boldly, love our city deeply, and build lasting and strategic partnerships that
transform lives.’’
Earlier this year, The Remedy
Church moved to downtown Akron, further establishing themselves in the
greater Akron faith community. Their
reach goes beyond the church doors, as
they have fed thousands, housed hundreds, and ministered in prisons and
throughout the community.
My husband, Kevin, and I recently
had the pleasure of attending a service
at The Remedy Church, which was also
their fifth anniversary. We were moved
by the enthusiastic spirit of fellowship,
joy, and genuine camaraderie that
filled the sanctuary.
I sincerely congratulate Pastor Lav,
Pastor Lesa, and The Remedy Church
congregation on their fifth anniversary. May they continue to grow, serve,
and be a blessing to both our community and the Lord and Savior for years
to come.
f

HONORING DEPUTY INSURANCE
COMMISSIONER STEVE MANDERS
(Mr. CARTER of Georgia asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor the life and
legacy of Deputy Insurance Commissioner Steve Manders, a dedicated public servant who passed away on January 17 at the age of 64.
This recognition celebrates a man
who gave 38 years of faithful service to
the State of Georgia, rising to the role
of deputy insurance commissioner,
where he exemplified steady leadership, expertise, and integrity in protecting consumers and overseeing our
insurance marketplace.
Steve was a devoted family man. He
is survived by his wife of 39 years,
Mindy; daughters Merritt and Morgan;
and three cherished grandchildren.
Steve found great joy in golfing, fishing, and creating lasting memories
with his family. Steve was also a respected baseball umpire who proudly
officiated the College World Series
three times, reflecting his passion for
the game he loved.
Steve’s life of service, family devotion, and strength is truly inspirational and leaves an enduring impact
on our State.
The State of Georgia is stronger because of Mr. Manders, and he will be
missed dearly.
f

ABOLISHING ICE
(Mr. THANEDAR asked and was
given permission to address the House

PO 00000

Frm 00162

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. THANEDAR. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in support of abolishing ICE.
ICE is out of control. Just in the past
month, against American citizens, ICE
has shot and killed a 37-year-old mother of three, tear-gassed a 6-month-old
baby in his parents’ car, and hauled out
a grandfather in 14-degree weather in
nothing but his underwear.
Thanks to Donald Trump and Kristi
Noem, our communities constantly live
in fear of those who are supposed to
protect them.
When an agency structure consistently produces harm instead of justice,
there is no way to reform it. We must
abolish ICE.
f

CONGRATULATING FRANK CRUM
(Ms. HAGEMAN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. HAGEMAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to recognize and congratulate
Laramie, Wyoming’s very own Frank
Crum for his performance and touchdown in the Denver Broncos playoff
win versus the Buffalo Bills this past
weekend.
As an offensive lineman, it is not
often that Frank finds himself open
downfield. In fact, this was Frank’s
first reception and first touchdown of
his NFL career. Frank’s touchdown is
the result of an unwavering work ethic
and a commitment to excellence.
Following a commendable collegiate
career at the University of Wyoming,
Frank went undrafted in the 2024 draft,
but he did not let that deter him. He
signed with the Denver Broncos as an
undrafted free agent. Frank showed
grit and determination, working his
way up the roster to become a key
piece of the Denver Broncos’ offensive
line.
Frank’s dedication and commitment
paid off this weekend, as he scored an
iconic touchdown that was key in the
Broncos’ 33–30 victory.
Please join me in recognizing and
celebrating the hard work and successes of Wyoming’s Frank Crum.
f

ANTHONY URIBE RECOGNIZED AS
YOUNG PROFESSIONAL OF THE
YEAR
(Mr. BERA asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute.)
Mr. BERA. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to celebrate one of my staff members,
Anthony Uribe, who is being recognized
by the Sacramento Metro Chamber of
Commerce as a Young Professional of
the Year.
Anthony joined my staff in 2018,
when he was a senior at Sacramento
State, as an intern. He came on as a
staff assistant and has been working
his way up. Anthony has shown grit
and perseverance, representing the
Sacramento communities of North

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.107

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

Sacramento, Del Paso Heights, and
Natomas. He is a great extension of
what we do.
Anthony is innovative. One of the
best Anthony stories is that, as a staff
assistant, you have to pick the Member
of Congress up early in the morning
sometimes. Because I am on the West
Coast, that is a 4 a.m. pickup call. One
morning, he may have overslept his
alarm clock there, so he got there and
said: I will get you to the airport, Mr.
Congressman.
For those in Sacramento County, he
got me from Elk Grove to the airport
in 10 minutes flat. Maybe there was a
little bit of speeding there.
I congratulate Anthony. I wish I was
there with him for the awards ceremony. It is a well-deserved award.
f

b 1750
NO MORE TAX DOLLARS FOR
CALIFORNIA’S HIGH-SPEED RAIL
(Mr. KILEY of California asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. KILEY of California. Mr. Speaker, a year ago, I introduced legislation
to cut off all funding for California’s
high-speed rail project and today, in an
overwhelming, bipartisan vote, the
House passed this measure as part of
an appropriations bill that will soon be
signed into law.
This is fantastic news for American
taxpayers and for California taxpayers
as the high-speed rail project is the
biggest public infrastructure failure in
United States history. It was supposed
to be done in 2020 and yet now in 2026,
no track has been laid despite spending
$18 billion.
The
estimated
total
cost
has
ballooned from $33 billion to $128 billion, and even The New York Times
found that it is not on pace to be finished this century.
With the success of this legislation,
our Federal tax dollars in California
can go where they are needed when it
comes to transportation and that is to
improve our failing roads, to alleviate
traffic, and to actually improve the
quality of life for Californians.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

HONORING THE LIFE OF ROGER
RANSOM
(Mr. TAKANO asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. TAKANO. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the life of a friend and
a pillar of Riverside: Roger Ransom,
who died on December 28, 2025, at the
age of 87.
I knew Roger for many decades. He
was smart, funny, and unfailingly insightful. It was deeply fortunate for all
of us that he should have spent so long
at University of California Riverside as
a distinguished professor of history and
economics.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:26 Jan 23, 2026

H1337

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

His brilliance shone through in the
wide range of books, articles, and papers he published across his storied
academic career. Beyond his ability to
write and to do research, he also
showed a special ability to teach and
mentor students.
It is a testament to Roger that he
never let his curiosity abate, writing
his final book even in his final months
of his life.
Mr. Speaker, my heart goes out to
his extraordinary wife, Connie, his entire family, and all of the innumerable
lives he touched along the way. Rest
easy, Roger. You have earned it.
f

ADVOCATING FOR MILITARY
FAMILIES
(Mrs. KIGGANS of Virginia asked
and was given permission to address
the House for 1 minute and to revise
and extend her remarks.)
Mrs. KIGGANS of Virginia. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to recognize my
bill, the Care for Military Kids Act,
that was included in the appropriations
package for 2026 that just passed the
House.
As a proud Representative of Virginia’s Second Congressional District,
home to one of the largest Active-Duty
military populations in the United
States, advocating for those who serve
our country and their families is one of
my top priorities.
Unlike civilian families, military
families often need to move every 2 to
3 years, not by choice but by obligation.
When relocated to another State,
servicemembers uproot their whole
lives to answer the call to serve and
their families often sacrifice a great
deal.
For servicemembers who have dependents with disabilities, the sacrifice
can greatly impact their livelihood.
Unfortunately, with every move, dependent children must re-enter entirely new State health systems with
new Medicaid rules, new waiver programs, new provider networks, and
long wait lists.
The Care for Military Kids Act would
ensure that any dependent of an Active-Duty servicemember ¥ currently
receiving long-term care services
through a State administered Medicaid
plan, will remain eligible should their
family be stationed outside the State,
ensuring our servicemembers do not
have to choose between serving their
country and getting their children the
critical care they need.
Mr. Speaker, I was grateful that this
important piece of legislation was included in the appropriations package
for 2026.
f

DHS IS WORKING WITH NO OVERSIGHT AND NO ACCOUNTABILITY
(Ms. MORRISON asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)

PO 00000

Frm 00163

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Ms. MORRISON. Mr. Speaker, I rise
to express my horror at what we are
witnessing in Minnesota. Kristi Noem’s
DHS has been working with no oversight and no accountability. The irresponsibility and recklessness are costing human lives.
ICE is terrorizing our communities,
indiscriminately
racially
profiling,
using force against peaceful protesters,
barging into people’s homes without
warrants, preventing doctors from
treating their patients, blocking students from their classrooms, snatching
children, elderly people, pregnant
women, veterans, active military, and
American citizens from our streets.
Republicans have been silent while
this administration terrorizes people in
communities and violates the rights
and freedoms enshrined in our Constitution.
What will it take for the majority in
this Congress to speak up? Where is
your line?
Our communities deserve the dignity
of safety and justice, not the cruelty of
silence and complicity. You can stop
this. Please stand up. Stand up for the
Constitution, stand up for freedom,
stand up for liberty, stand up for justice, and stand up for humanity.
f

HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF DR. EDDIE FLOYD
(Mr. FRY asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. FRY. Mr. Speaker, in rather sad
news, I rise today to honor the life and
legacy of Dr. Eddie Floyd of Florence,
South Carolina.
Dr. Floyd was a lifelong Gamecock, a
respected physician, a pillar in his
community, but more than his titles,
he really embodied a life of service to
others.
From his decades caring for patients
to his more than 40 years of leadership
at the University of South Carolina, including serving as chairman of the
board of trustees, Dr. Floyd believed in
investing in people and in the future of
our State.
He loved his community. He loved his
family. He loved his alma mater certainly, and he worked every day to
make all of them stronger. He leaves
behind a legacy of service, leadership,
and kindness.
Mr. Speaker, my prayers are with the
Floyd family and with everyone who
had the privilege of knowing him.
South Carolina is a better place because of his service.
f

CONSEQUENCES OF DELAYING
COAL ASH CLEANUP
(Mr. TONKO asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. TONKO. Mr. Speaker, in just 1
short year, our constituents have already begun to suffer the consequences

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.109

H22JAPT1

H1338

of the Trump administration’s agenda
to undo lifesaving environmental protections.
The latest rollback is expected to
target key parts of the EPA’s 2015 and
2024 coal ash rules. Coal ash, a byproduct of coal combustion by power
plants, contains hazardous heavy metals that if left unregulated can pollute
our land and our water.
The effects of these toxins on the
human body include increased risk of
heart disease, cancer, and cardiovascular disease.
Certainly protections, like monitoring ground water and lining legacy
coal ash ponds to prevent contamination, are common sense, but these requirements are at risk of being weakened. Delaying coal ash cleanup puts
public health in danger.
Make
no
mistake
who
those
rollbacks are for: Polluters who would
rather poison ground water than pay a
little bit more to protect the public.
We should be accelerating cleanup, not
creating loopholes that allow toxic
waste to sit leaking and unregulated
for years to come.
Mr. Speaker, I urge Members to join
me in speaking out against this attack
on the rules protecting us from coal
ash.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY
OF TIMOTHY C. HESS
(Mr. MCGUIRE asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. MCGUIRE. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor the legacy and life of
Timothy C. Hess, a loving husband, father, and grandfather, who passed away
peacefully on November 26, 2025.
Tim Hess was born in Cincinnati,
Ohio, on October 11, 1949, and raised in
St. Petersburg, Florida, by Curt and
Joan Hess.
After graduating from Milligan College, Tim began his professional journey at The Sea Pines Resort in South
Carolina.
In 1975, he moved to Nelson County,
where he played a pivotal role in opening a staple of Virginia’s Fifth Congressional District: Wintergreen Resort.
At Wintergreen Resort, a location
known by many Virginians, he met the
love of his life and wife of 48 years,
Lynne, and raised their three children:
Greg, Lauren, and Paul.
Over the next five decades, Tim became a respected agent, broker, developer, and managing partner of the Wintergreen Real Estate Company.
Mr. Speaker, Tim Hess will be deeply
missed, but he will be remembered for
his legacy in Nelson County and in the
many lives he touched. Please join me
in honoring his life of service, conservation, and kindness.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:26 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

b 1800
COMMUNITIES DESERVE SAFETY
(Ms. OMAR asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. OMAR. Mr. Speaker, instead of
holding ICE accountable for their horrific behavior, including their violent
occupation of American cities like
Minneapolis, Republicans voted on giving ICE billions of dollars to terrorize
our communities. It is beyond shameful.
ICE operates with no meaningful
oversight and continues to act with impunity, even as it carries out violent
operations that have cost lives.
I am sick and tired of seeing Republicans reward a rogue agency that inflicts harm on our communities. Congressional Republicans greenlit sending $400 million more to ICE detention
and $370 million more to ICE enforcement. This is on top of the unprecedented $170 billion the agency received
in Trump’s big, ugly bill.
ICE has tormented our communities.
Let’s be clear: What we are witnessing
from ICE is not law enforcement. It is
State-sanctioned violence. A woman
was killed by ICE.
Mr. Speaker, our communities deserve safety and justice, not militarized crackdowns and murder.

Mr. MENENDEZ. Mr. Speaker, last
week, a mother of three, a U.S. citizen,
was killed in broad daylight. You
would think in that moment Republicans would find their voice to speak
out against the cruelty of this administration. Her children were robbed of
memories that make a life, and they
won’t have their mother there for
them.
This week, ICE, DHS took this 5year-old boy, Liam Ramos, from his
family and from his community. This
is what Liam’s teacher says about him:
‘‘He is very friendly. He comes into
class every day, and he just brightens
the room. His friends haven’t asked
about him yet, but I know that they’ll
catch on.’’
Mr. Speaker, what they will catch
onto, those 5-year-olds, the age of my
daughter, is that this government, this
administration,
House
Republicans
have failed the American people. They
failed our communities. They failed to
keep us safe in the name of something
that the Trump administration has lied
to the American people about.
This is the face of the people you are
taking from our communities, from
their families. It is unacceptable. It is
unacceptable that you have not found
your voice to speak out against it.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to direct their comments to the Chair.

f

f

CELEBRATING MUNICIPAL WATER
DISTRICT OF ORANGE COUNTY’S
75TH ANNIVERSARY
(Mrs. KIM asked and was given permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Mrs. KIM. Mr. Speaker, today I rise
to celebrate 75 years of leadership and
public service by the Municipal Water
District of Orange County. This milestone isn’t just about longevity. It is
about leading through change and
planning for the future.
Municipal Water District of Orange
County was founded on a simple, yet
powerful, idea. Regional collaboration
is stronger than working alone. By
uniting local agencies and securing access to imported water supplies, the
district has helped lay the foundation
for Orange County’s economic growth,
public health, and quality of life.
Mr. Speaker, 75 years later, Municipal Water District of Orange County
remains a model of responsible governance and regional cooperation. It is
well-prepared to meet the next 75 years
with the same leadership and integrity
that has built Orange County into what
it is today.
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate them on
75 years, and I thank them for serving
our community.
f

HONORING DERRICK MARTELL
ROSE
(Mr. JACKSON of Illinois asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. JACKSON of Illinois. Mr. Speaker, I rise today with gratitude, with
pride, and with purpose to honor a son
of Chicago, Mr. Derrick Martell Rose.
From the hard concrete of Englewood
to the shining floor of the United Center, his journey has been a testimony
that greatness can rise from any ZIP
Code when faith meets discipline and
talent meets sacrifice.
When Derrick Rose became the
youngest Most Valuable Player in NBA
history, he did not just break a record;
he broke a ceiling. He showed our children that brilliance can be humble,
that power can be quiet, and that excellence does not require abandonment
of one’s roots.
When injury knocked him down, Derrick Rose got back up, not bitter, not
broken, but better, still believing, still
becoming. Today as his jersey is lifted
to the rafters, we lift a lesson. We can
stumble and still stand. We can fall and
still fly.
Derrick Rose is not just an MVP of
basketball. Mr. ROSE is an MVP of resilience, of hope, of our sweet home,
Chicago.

SPEAKING OUT AGAINST ICE
(Mr. MENENDEZ asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)

CELEBRATING AND DEFENDING
LIFE
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. SMITH of

PO 00000

Frm 00164

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

f

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.111

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

New Jersey was recognized for 60 minutes as the designee of the majority
leader.)
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, Roe v. Wade was overturned
by the decision in Dobbs. It was January 22, 1973, when the U.S. Supreme
Court infamously said that the unborn
child has no worth, no standing in law
whatsoever, and legalized abortion
right until the moment of birth.
We have tried for years. I actually
met my wife, Marie, in the pro-life
movement 50 years ago at college—
more than 50 years ago. We do believe,
like so many of my colleagues, that
life is a gift to be protected and preserved, and that birth is an event that
happens to every one of us. It is not the
beginning of life.
To think that somehow the unborn
child is a throwaway and nothing but
an entity that can be destroyed at will
is very, very inhumane. We need to
speak out, as we are doing.
I would point out to my colleagues—
and I will be very brief and yield to my
colleagues who are here—there are
more than 2,700 pregnancy care centers
throughout the United States, working
to help women choose life. Each and
every one of them is an oasis of love,
compassion, empathy, respect, and care
for mothers and their precious children.
Yet, some States and lawmakers, including my own State of New Jersey,
seek to discriminate against pregnancy
care centers by violating fundamental
conscience rights, including trying to
compel these centers to participate or
be complicit in abortions. We saw that
especially in California.
The Knights of Columbus has released a poll which found that 83 percent of Americans, including 79 percent
of Democrats, support pregnancy resource centers. We wouldn’t have
known that, watching the debate just a
couple of days ago on MICHELLE
FISCHBACH’s very, very important piece
of legislation, Supporting Pregnant
and Parenting Women and Families
Act. It did pass. I thank her for her extraordinary leadership and courage.
We found during the Biden administration that he was actually working
toward a rule that would have precluded any kind of TANF funding—food
stamps and the like—to pregnancy care
centers to be administered and provided to their clients.
That would have been so cruel to say
that, no, we are dealing with this
woman who is poor—they are not all
poor that go there, some are indigent,
but they need help. All of a sudden, we
find out that Biden wanted to say that
those centers can’t participate in this
program. Mr. Speaker, six States do, I
am happy to say, and they do provide
TANF funding.
Again, MICHELLE FISCHBACH’s bill—
and I have more to say during this, but
I would like to yield to her. She is in a
Ways and Means Committee meeting
now. It is underway. I thank her for
that leadership. I can’t say how important these pregnancy care centers are.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:26 Jan 23, 2026

H1339

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

I have been working with them for
over 50 years. Louise Summerhill from
Canada started the first group of them
called Birthright. They were there to
say: Look, we love you. We will help
you. All of the centers that are now in
existence do an amazing job. They are
global. Again, there are 2,700 of these
tremendous centers in our country. We
have got about 55 of them in my own
State alone.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman
from
Minnesota
(Mrs.
FISCHBACH) and thank her for her legislation this week.
Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I
have known Representative SMITH for
many years through the pro-life movement. He and his wife, Marie, have
dedicated so much time, energy, and
effort to promote the culture of life
and making sure that women, their
families, and their babies are cared for
and supported.
I thank Representative SMITH and his
lovely wife, Marie, for all that they
have done. He is an inspiration in this
movement and this fight to make sure
that babies are protected.
b 1810
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, I would add that the gentlewoman’s husband, Scott, is a tremendous leader and head of National Right
to Life.
Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman so much for his
comments, but the gentleman from
New Jersey (Mr. SMITH) has done so
much by leading us through this.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today with a
heart full of gratitude, not only for the
privilege of serving the people of western Minnesota but for the significant
step the House took yesterday of passing the Supporting Pregnant and Parenting Women and Families Act.
This is more than just a legislative
win. This is a victory for every woman
who has ever felt alone during a pregnancy. It is a victory for every father
who wants to provide for their child,
and it is a victory for the thousands of
pregnancy resource centers across our
Nation that offer a hand to hold when
an uncertain path is faced.
We didn’t just vote for a policy. We
voted for hope. For me, the pro-life
movement has never been just a political platform or a set of talking points.
It is personal. As a mother and a
grandmother, I have seen the miracle
of life at every stage, from that first
grainy image on an ultrasound that everyone clings to, to the incredible moment of feeling a child’s first kick, and
then that moment when you get to
meet that child face to face for the
first time.
Those memories drive me to ensure
that every woman in this country has
the support that she needs to experience those same miracles with confidence rather than fear.
My journey in public service has been
shaped by these moments. From my
time in the Minnesota State Senate to

PO 00000

Frm 00165

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

my role as the co-chair of the Congressional Pro-Life Caucus, my mission has
been simple: To ensure that our laws
reflect the beauty and the value of
every human life.
Being pro-life means so much more
than being anti-abortion. To be truly
pro-life is to be pro-woman and
profamily. We must acknowledge that,
for many women, an unexpected pregnancy comes with fear, uncertainty,
and financial strain. Our response as a
movement and as a government must
be one of clear and tangible support.
We need to be able to tell mothers
that they are not alone. The pro-life
movement is a positive one, a movement that surrounds women and their
children with hope and support.
I have fought to advance policies to
make it easier to raise a family, whether it was expanding the child tax credit, supporting maternal healthcare, or
streamlining the adoption process. Our
goal is to create a culture where every
mother feels empowered to choose life
because she knows that she has the resources to flourish.
I have stood firmly for the BornAlive Abortion Survivors Protection
Act because every child who enters this
world deserves the same medical care
regardless of the circumstances of their
birth. I have advocated for the Hyde
amendment, ensuring that the conscious rights of millions of Americans
are respected and that taxpayer dollars
are not used to fund the destruction of
human life.
These are not extreme positions.
They are compassionate positions.
They are positions rooted in the belief
that a society is measured by how it
treats those who have no power, no
vote, and no voice. My goal is to build
a country where every child is welcomed in life and protected by law.
Tomorrow, thousands of Americans,
many of them young students and family, will descend on our Nation’s Capital and across the country at State
marches in every corner of the country. In my home State of Minnesota,
they gathered today at the State capitol, even in the extreme cold.
They will march, determined to build
a culture of life, a culture that supports a father who wants to be present,
a mother who is finishing her education, and a child who is waiting to
take their first breath.
The pro-life movement is often characterized by what they are against, but
with the passage of the Supporting
Pregnant and Parenting Women and
Families Act, we have shown what we
are for. We are for the mother. We are
for the baby. We are for the family.
As the marchers arrive in Washington tonight and tomorrow morning,
let them know that their voices have
been heard in these Halls. Let them
know that we will not stop working
until our laws reflect the beautiful
truth that every life is a gift from God.
I am proud of the work we have done,
and I am even more hopeful for the
work we will do tomorrow and into the
future.

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.114

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1340

Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, I thank the gentlewoman
from Minnesota for her very eloquent
remarks, and as former president of the
Minnesota Senate, where she was a
great leader there. I thank the gentlewoman for her work on all of these
issues, but especially this week on getting that important bill passed.
Mrs. FISCHBACH. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the gentleman very much for his
comments.
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, I now recognize the gentlewoman from Illinois (Mrs. MILLER),
who is a great voice, has great strength
on behalf of the family and the unborn
child, and has a number of bills that
she has offered dealing with the life
issue.
Mrs. MILLER of Illinois. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, 53 years ago, the tragedy of Roe v. Wade was decided, and 65
million innocent lives are not here. It
is hard to even calculate the loss that
this has been. God created them. God
had a purpose for their lives, and God
meant to bless the world through
them.
Perhaps they were teachers who
could have nurtured the next generation, doctors who could have cured cancer, lawyers who could have defended
the defenseless, or musicians who could
have written the next great symphony.
Thankfully, on June 24, 2022, the Supreme Court overturned Roe, returning
the issue of abortion to Congress and
the States. Since Dobbs, 17 States have
acted to protect life from the moment
of conception.
Still, there is so much work to be
done. An equal number of States now
allow abortion through all 9 months of
pregnancy, including my home State of
Illinois.
Last year, this body took a significant step forward by defunding
Planned Parenthood in the working
families tax cut, resulting in 50 of their
clinics closing.
By the way, Planned Parenthood is
not pro-choice. They are pro-abortion.
If they were pro-choice, they would
want women to make informed choices,
which is why I want to pass legislation
requiring an ultrasound to be done and
a waiting period before a woman has an
abortion.
The greatest privilege of my life is to
be a mother of 7, grandma of 23, and
soon to be a great-grandma. That includes being a grandma to two children
with Down syndrome, one born to us
and one adopted.
Every time I meet young couples, I
encourage them to have one more.
Psalm 127 reminds us that children are
a heritage from the Lord.
Mr. Speaker, I thank Congressman
SMITH for his leadership in defending
the most vulnerable. I look forward to
working with the gentleman and our
colleagues to secure more pro-life victories.
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, I thank the gentlewoman

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:26 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

from Illinois (Mrs. MILLER) for her
great leadership. Her voice is always
there, and I thank her so much for
that.
Mr. Speaker, I now yield to the gentleman from Missouri (Mr. ONDER), who
is co-chair of the Congressional ProLife Caucus. He also is the author of
laws when he was in the legislature in
Missouri, and he is a doctor and really
gets it, and also has another degree in
law. He is the package. He does it all.
Mr. ONDER. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Chairman SMITH for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, for decades under Chairman SMITH’s leadership, the House ProLife Caucus has worked as a strong coalition for life, and I am grateful to
serve along with the gentleman as a
caucus co-chairman.
Today, we remember the 53rd anniversary of the erroneous and lawless
Supreme Court decision, Roe v. Wade.
When the Court held that the 14th
Amendment’s reference to liberty protected a right to abortion, with the
stroke of a pen, the Supreme Court empowered the abortion industry to kill
millions of unborn children.
A research paper published in the
‘‘American Journal of Public Health’’
two decades after Roe found that the
Supreme Court’s decision caused a 4.5
percent decline in births in States
where abortion was not already legal.
Vast numbers of babies were never
born.
Thankfully, the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in one of the biggest victories for life in American history. Dobbs v. Jackson rightfully
upheld that the Constitution does not
confer a right to abortion, returning
the authority to regulate abortion to
the American people and to their elected Representatives.
The Constitution makes no explicit
reference to obtain an abortion. The
Founding Fathers never intended the
Constitution to give a license to kill.
b 1820
Unlike the post-Roe era, where births
noticeably declined, Dobbs v. Jackson
ushered in the current pro-life era. A
study from the Journal of the American Medical Association found that
from the Dobbs v. Jackson decision on
June 24, 2022, through the end of 2023,
22,000 more babies were born in States
that enacted pro-life laws.
Even though Dobbs v. Jackson saved
many lives, our work to defend the unborn is far from finished. For decades,
Federal tax dollars have supported disturbing, outdated, and ghoulish research on tissues obtained from aborted babies. Biden’s National Institutes
of Health devoted roughly $53 million
to human fetal tissue research in both
2023 and 2024. Despite spending millions
of dollars on this barbaric research, it
has failed to produce any meaningful
medical breakthrough. Not a single
therapy depends on aborted fetal tissue
research.
At the same time, proven and ethical
alternatives exist. Lifesaving treat-

PO 00000

Frm 00166

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ments, such as insulin for diabetes and
Herceptin for cancer, were developed
without fetal tissue research. Umbilical cord blood is used to successfully
treat thousands of patients with blood
disorders, and adult stem cell therapies
have benefited over a million people
worldwide, addressing cancers, blood
diseases, and autoimmune diseases.
There is no justification for continuing to fund research using aborted
fetal tissue. That is why I introduced
the Protecting Life and Integrity in
Research Act, which blocks all Federal
funding of research using human fetal
tissue obtained from an induced abortion.
Earlier this year, I met with NIH Director Jay Bhattacharya to discuss
this, and he agreed that it is high time
to end aborted fetal tissue research at
the NIH.
That is why I am happy to say today
that the NIH announced that they will
no longer support research with human
fetal tissue. This is a huge victory, and
I thank Dr. Bhattacharya for his work
righting the ship at NIH. Now it is time
for Congress to finish the job by passing the Protecting Life and Integrity
in Research Act to make this change
permanent.
Finally, I want to applaud the thousands of pro-life champions who will be
attending tomorrow’s March for Life
here in Washington, D.C. Your courage
and advocacy are vital to advancing
the cause of life.
The fight for human dignity is a worthy cause. Never give up fighting for
unborn children who cannot fight for
themselves.
Scripture tells us that God has a plan
for every human life before it comes
into existence on Earth. In Jeremiah
1:5, God tells the prophet Jeremiah:
‘‘Before I formed you in the womb, I
knew you. Before you were born, I dedicated you.’’
We also read in the book of St. Luke
that Elizabeth’s baby leapt in the
womb upon hearing Mary’s greeting.
That baby that leapt for joy in Elizabeth’s womb was none other than John
the Baptist, who prepared the way for
the Lord and baptized him in the River
Jordan.
Please continue to keep your elected
officials in your prayers as we strive to
promote a culture of life.
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, I thank Bob for his leadership.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentlewoman from Wyoming (Ms. HAGEMAN).
I would just point out for the record
that she has 34 years as a litigator, is
admitted to practice in several States
and the United States Supreme Court,
and is a distinguished member of the
Committee on the Judiciary.
Ms. HAGEMAN. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Mr. SMITH for the honor of being able
to speak this evening.
Mr. Speaker, I rise tonight as we
mark with sadness the anniversary of
the Roe v. Wade decision, a ruling that
for decades removed the most basic and

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.115

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

fundamental right we hold, the right to
life itself. I stand here unwavering in
my conviction that every human life is
a sacred gift and deserves our protection.
Life begins at conception, and it is
our solemn duty as lawmakers to defend those who cannot speak for themselves. We should never tire of advocating for the most vulnerable among
us, and we must continue striving for a
culture that cherishes life at every
stage.
Since the Supreme Court returned
authority over this issue to the States
with the Dobbs decision, millions of
Americans have exercised their democratic voice, but our work is not done.
We must keep pushing for laws that
protect life, support families, and uphold the values that make America a
beacon of freedom and justice.
May we rededicate ourselves to defending the unborn and promoting a society where every life has dignity and
every voice is heard.
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from
Georgia (Mr. CLYDE). He is a combat
veteran who served for 28 years, a
member of the Committee on Appropriations, and just has been, again,
outspoken and very effective over these
years on defending the unborn.
Mr. CLYDE. Mr. Speaker, I thank
Congressman SMITH for holding tonight’s Special Order. It is so very important.
Fifty-three years ago, the U.S. Supreme Court issued one of the most
horrendous and devastating rulings in
its nearly 237-year-old history. On this
solemn anniversary, we pause to remember the unborn babies who had
their lives unjustly stolen under the
evils of the Roe v. Wade decision.
This treacherous ruling paved the
way for the murder of more than 63
million unborn children. These precious souls were denied their first and
most fundamental right: the right to
life.
Our Declaration of Independence
rightly proclaims that we are endowed
by
our
‘‘creator
with
certain
unalienable rights, that among these
are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness,’’ and ‘‘that to secure these
rights, governments are instituted
among men.’’ That is right, the responsibility of government is to secure
these rights, to preserve the right to
life.
Our God-given right to life should be
universally recognized as a blessing,
not flagrantly disregarded in an attempt to justify the murder of innocent, unborn children.
While our Nation will never know the
friends, colleagues, and leaders lost to
the evils of abortion, it is our solemn
obligation to honor and mourn these
unborn lives. That is why, both this
Congress and last Congress, I have
proudly led a resolution to recognize
today, January 22, as the day of tears.
In addition to this somber recognition, may we also give thanks to God
Almighty for his gracious blessings of
the victorious Dobbs decision, which
effectively overturned Roe v. Wade.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:43 Jan 23, 2026

H1341

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Dobbs marks an incredible, historic
victory in the fight to protect the unborn. Yet, we must remain ever vigilant, using every tool at our disposal to
uphold and defend the sanctity of
human life.
Tomorrow, I will be participating in
the March for Life right here in Washington, D.C. As an unapologetic pro-life
conservative, I am proud to be part of
this fight because every life is invaluable, worthy, and made in the perfect
image of God.
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from
Wisconsin (Mr. GROTHMAN), who has
four committee assignments: Budget,
Judiciary, Education and Workforce,
and Oversight and Government Reform. I don’t know where he finds the
time, but I do thank him for his great
leadership on pro-life.
Mr. GROTHMAN. Mr. Speaker, this
is a weekend chosen to be the week
that Roe v. Wade went into effect in
1973 and that we mourn the deaths of
the millions of Americans whose lives
were cut short by abortion.
It is particularly sad that recently
the abortion rate in this country has
been going up. That is a stain on our
country and, quite frankly, a stain on
the churches that are failing to educate our young people on the importance of keeping every life going.
It is interesting that, in Wisconsin,
abortion was illegal from around 1850
until Roe v. Wade went into effect. At
that time, there were no ultrasounds.
Medical care was a fraction of what it
is today. Despite the fact that medical
care was worse than it is today, everybody knew that abortion was horrific,
ultrasound or not. I don’t believe there
was a strong effort made until Roe v.
Wade to legalize abortion in the State
of Wisconsin until the Supreme Court
did it.
We have to ask ourselves, the people:
What has happened? What has happened to young Americans? Right now,
to be honest, politically, to run pro-life
in the State of Wisconsin, or at least in
many States around the country, is a
negative.
b 1830
When I first got involved in public
life, I think the majority of people
were broadly considered pro-life. Now
the opposite is true.
Why is that? Who do we blame for
the fact that acceptance of abortion
has gone up over the last 9 or 10 years?
I am going to suggest the churches
have to be more vocal and do a better
job of educating people about this
issue.
Like I said, in today’s world with
ultrasounds, in today’s world with such
great medical care that it would be virtually impossible to have serious consequences after having an abortion, it
should be easier than ever to make people pro-life. Unfortunately, that is not
so.
So what I will do today is I will challenge the churches and anybody out
there listening, members of a church,
the laity, the priests, the ministers, to
do what they can to educate the child-

PO 00000

Frm 00167

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

bearing women in your church or of
childbearing age of the horrors of abortion and the importance for everybody
to do what they can to prevent these
precious lives from being cut short.
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from
Alabama (Mr. ADERHOLT), the distinguished chairman of the Labor, Health
and Human Services, Education, and
Related Agencies Appropriations Subcommittee. He is also the chair of the
House Values Action Team.
Mr. ADERHOLT. Mr. Speaker, it is
great to have a chance to address the
House on this anniversary of the Supreme Court’s decision and to recognize the tragedy that took place in
1973.
Of course, the Dobbs decision as we
know rightly returned this issue to the
American people and their elected Representatives. But our work continues
to make sure that the lives of the unborn are protected both on the State
and on the Federal level.
I want to just say thank you to CHRIS
SMITH and the chairs of the Pro-Life
Caucus for their continued work on the
pro-life issue. Having served with CHRIS
SMITH for many, many years here in
the House of Representatives, I can tell
you this is an issue that he takes very
seriously, as he should, and for his
leadership we applaud him. I thank
him for all his hard work and all that
he does in chairing the Pro-Life Caucus.
Also, I want to thank the marchers
for life for organizing a powerful and
meaningful day that we will have tomorrow as Americans across the
United States unite in their commitment to celebrate and defend life.
Here in Congress it is one of my
greatest honors to be a voice on Capitol Hill for the most vulnerable among
us: our unborn children.
For me, my pro-life stance is deeply
rooted in my Christian faith and belief
that all human life is precious, and it
is a gift from the almighty God. Defending the unborn has long been one
of my highest priorities, and the first
term I got elected to Congress, one of
my first votes was cast in favor of life.
This is a celebration of life to celebrate the Dobbs decision. It is a celebration of lives that have been saved
thanks to advocates like March for
Life. I would like to thank every advocate for their unwavering dedication to
this cause. I look forward to continuing our work together until every
child is guaranteed our most fundamental right, and that is the right to
life.
As I have said before, no argument
made by the other side can triumph
this one undeniable fact, and that is
abortion stops a beating heart.
Mr. Speaker, may God bless you, and
may God bless the unborn in this country and around the world.
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, I do want to thank the gentleman, especially for his leadership as

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.117

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1342

the chairman of the Labor, Health and
Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies bill. He has worked so
hard to preserve the Hyde amendment
and all the other important pro-life
amendments that have to be renewed
every single year. The gentleman has
been a force. He stands tall. He makes
a very, very articulate argument, not
only in committee but here on the
floor, and I thank the gentleman for
that. It is truly remarkable.
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude my
comments, today first, by noting how
grateful I am to the Members of this
House who speak out with compassion
and boldly in defense of the unborn and
equally of their mothers.
Abortion has two victims—three if
there are twins—the babies and then
their moms. Then there is even extenuating damage done to the family that
is grossly underappreciated with father’s rights being abridged and completely set aside with this so-called
abortion decision.
Let me point out to my colleagues
that the purveyors of death and their
enablers in politics, the media, and
academia aggressively foster a culture
of death, denial, disrespect, and discrimination against babies and employ
an endless array of deceitful tactics designed to trivialize and mask the cruel
and ugly reality of abortion, presenting
the violence of abortion as a so-called
right.
One only has to look beyond the slogans and surface appeal arguments to
find the harsh reality of abortion. The
abortion pill mifepristone is baby poison. It kills the unborn child by starving the innocent baby to death.
I do a lot on world hunger. I do a lot
on domestic hunger. Mr. Speaker, I believe in the importance of nutrition.
Two global food security acts have
passed this House as my bills. In the
past they went on to become law. I believe in it strongly, and, yet,
mifepristone, the abortion pill, starves
the baby to death.
I had a meeting with the Secretary
General of the United Nations Guterres
in my office a couple years ago, and he,
too, believes in alleviating and ameliorating world hunger. I said: Mr. Secretary General, how could we be simultaneously looking to mitigate the damage of crop failure, famine, and all the
others and its implications for food insecurity while simultaneously starving
an entire segment of society, unborn
babies, to death? How could we do
that? He had no answer. His staff had
no answer.
We have to face these realities and
stop looking askance and looking as if
they don’t exist. It is a horrible reality.
Let me also point out to my colleagues that the abortion pill—about 60
percent of all the abortions now are
procured through mifepristone in the
United States. It is very dangerous to
women. Bill Clinton and his FDA Commissioner Kessler went over and begged
that Roussel Uclaf, who then was mar-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

08:43 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

keting this abortion pill, send it to the
United States.
Where does the FDA commissioner
come in saying we need this baby poison? It doesn’t cure anything, unless
you construe an unborn child to be a
tumor or something that needs to be
vanquished and excised, and of course,
they are not.
They are God’s gift to each and every
one of us, and every one of us here
today at one time was in that stage of
development as the unborn.
What we have now found out, which
is what we have known for years, is
that based on the most recent study by
the group, the Ethics and Public Policy
Center—it is the largest study ever
done, ever, nothing even comes close,
and they did it in a way that almost
takes out bias in terms of reporting—
they found, and, again, this is the biggest study we have ever seen, that
more than 1 in 10 patients experience a
serious adverse event from the abortion pill, 1 in 10. That is 10.93 percent.
What are these damages? These damages are serious infection; sepsis, which
could be life threatening; hemorrhaging; and a number of other adverse events.
Do you hear Planned Parenthood
ever saying, oh, the pill carries with it
all of these deleterious effects to
women? Never. They tell lies that deceive women and they say that, oh, it
is very, very safe.
b 1840
I am very critical of the FDA for all
these years. They did sham studies on
this over the years. We pointed it out.
Nobody listened, and now this study
breaks through and says: Please, the
women need to know that there are
very serious consequences to this abortion pill.
Let me also say to my colleagues
that, yes, everyone in the pro-life
movement who can make it will be at
the March for Life tomorrow here in
Washington. Thank God that the growing number of young people in this
country are pro-life, rejecting the very
surface appeal argumentation that has
been used to dismiss and trivialize the
beautiful life of an unborn child and,
again, the terrible effects that these
abortions have on women.
Today, and it will be announced officially tomorrow, the Trump Administration has just announced a comprehensive new policy protecting life in
foreign assistance. It is humane, lifeaffirming, and rejects the culture of
death which we have been exporting all
over the world by hijacking our foreign
aid for very good projects such as malaria alleviation and PEPFAR, which is
a good program, but it was hijacked by
the Biden administration. The recipients of that funding were told: Change
the policies of the country where you
are working to have abortion on demand.
The only reason PEPFAR didn’t get
reauthorized in the last Congress was
because of that, because he had hi-

PO 00000

Frm 00168

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

jacked it. Unfortunately, that is not
what we signed up for. We wanted to
mitigate mother-to-child transmission,
and I did the reauthorization of it for 5
years several years ago. I really believe
in it, and I was shocked, dismayed, and
angered that the Biden administration
took that money and used it for things
that it was not intended to be used for.
The new conditions that have been
now promulgated—the rule goes into
effect shortly, Monday, I believe—actually conditions $30 billion in foreign
aid to serve humanitarian and health
needs around the world instead of
bankrolling U.N. entities and NGOs
that promote and perform abortion violence.
Mr. Speaker, I can’t tell you how discouraged I am that the WHO has become just another Planned Parenthood, and they push abortion on demand right until birth. There are no
conscience rights, Mr. Speaker. If you
are an OB/GYN or a nurse or anyone
else, you can’t say: Please, I don’t want
to be involved. Governments would
have coercive power to say: You do
that, or else you are not licensed any
longer.
Mr. Speaker, I would say to my colleagues, too, that a Marist Poll that
was released today found that a huge
majority of Americans, 69 percent, oppose using tax dollars to support abortion in other countries. Mr. Speaker,
twenty-nine percent are for it. I would
point out that for the Independents it
is 59 percent. Republicans are even
higher, and Democrats are tied in
terms of those who support promoting
global abortion and those who do not,
but 69 percent in the aggregate feel
that way.
At this podium in 1985, I offered the
amendment to defund the UNFPA because of its forced abortion complicity
which was shameless—it is the same
today, in China, especially—but also to
protect the Reagan Mexico City policy
which has now been reiterated and
strengthened by the Trump administration.
This is really important, lifesaving
work, and I am shocked and dismayed,
again, that so many people don’t see
the very simple fact.
The next time you see an ultrasound,
Mr. Speaker, of children or your grandchildren, just remember those very
children at that very age are being dismembered or chemically poisoned by
this abortion pill. Again, I don’t know
how anybody defends dismemberment
abortions.
What got me into this movement way
back when, in 1972, was when I saw the
effect of a dismemberment abortion.
Limbs were hacked off, and decapitation of the head was seen as a benign
procedure called a D&E. I am just
shocked that people don’t see that that
is violence against children. Equally, it
is violence against mothers.
Mr. Speaker, I call on everyone who
might be watching this: Please pray for
this movement. Pray for the mothers.
Pregnancy care centers are filled to

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.119

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

overflowing with women who have had
abortions and never want to see another woman suffer like that.
I have met with so many. During the
Michelle Fischbach bill the other day I
talked about one woman who was trafficked. She was trafficked for years.
She was helped by a pregnancy care
center who just loved her and helped
her with her child both during the
pregnancy and afterward. Now she is
running a pregnancy care center because she cares so much that no other
woman experience whatever the trauma is that she had gone through. I do
thank her.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman
from Kentucky (Mr. BARR), who is my
good friend and colleague.
Mr. BARR. First of all, Mr. Speaker,
I thank my friend, the leader of the
Pro-Life Caucus, for his longstanding
leadership and commitment to this virtuous cause. He has made an amazing
difference. Perseverance is what defines this movement, and we are so
grateful for his leadership in this country and for this important cause.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor
the life and service of Tatum Elizabeth
Dale, a proud Kentuckian, a dedicated
public servant, and one of the best people I have ever had the blessing of serving with.
Tatum was my district director, and
she passed away at the young age of 35
years old on Christmas Eve from complications of moyamoya. For over 15
years, Tatum served side by side with
me for the people of the Sixth Congressional District and the Commonwealth
she loved.
She held almost every job a person
could hold in my office: scheduler, field
representative, deputy district director, district director, and, finally, deputy chief of staff.
She earned every role not through
ambition but through trust. Titles
never defined Tatum. Results did.
Tatum was Kentucky through and
through. She grew up on a farm outside
of Murray where she learned the values
that would guide her entire life: hard
work, humility, faith, loyalty, service
to others, and the cause of life. Those
values shaped everything she did.
She knew our district better than
anyone else. She knew the communities, the leaders, the families, and
the history. She remembered names,
conversations, and details others would
forget. Constituents didn’t see her as a
staffer or my district director. They
saw her as an advocate who listened,
followed through, and fought for them.
She was Tatum. She wasn’t the Congressman’s chief of staff. She was
Tatum.
Tatum had a special devotion to eastern Kentucky. She knew the hollers
and the highways, the county judges
and the community leaders, and the
unique challenges facing those communities. She made sure that they were
never overlooked.
One of the best examples of that commitment came in Menifee County

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:43 Jan 23, 2026

H1343

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

where she loved the people and she
loved the community. She took on the
U.S. Forest Service over the proposed
removal of the safety buoys at Cave
Run Lake. Tatum singlehandedly organized, advocated, and ultimately won,
protecting tourism, safety, and local
economic development. When the county newspaper ran a front-page story
about this victory, she proudly displayed it in her office throughout the
rest of her career.
She also poured herself into addiction recovery efforts, helping establish
the Sixth District addiction recovery
working group and securing millions of
dollars in Federal grants for Narcan
distribution, counseling, recovery services, and transitional housing. Her
work saved lives.
She was a fierce advocate for our veterans and helped set up and worked for
our veterans in casework with the veterans’ coalition.
Beyond government, Tatum lived her
faith. Through her church, she participated in mission trips to Haiti where
she served children living in deep poverty. She loved them, she prayed for
them, and she gave them hope. Service
for Tatum was not confined to a job description. She made a difference wherever she went.
Inside our office, Tatum was the
heartbeat of our team. Her leadership
philosophy was simple: last to eat, first
to fight.
She mentored young staff, protected
her colleagues, and demanded excellence, always with kindness. She
showed up early, stayed late, and never
asked anyone to do anything she
wouldn’t do herself.
She was also my most trusted adviser. She knew when to challenge
me—she did—and she knew when to
steady me. She made me a better Congressman, and she made our team better public servants.
Kentucky lost a daughter who honored her home in everything she did.
Our office lost a leader, our communities lost a fierce advocate, and all of
us lost a friend.
Her legacy lives on in the lives she
helped, in the problems she solved, and
in the example she set for what public
service should be.
Tatum Dale served others every single day of her life. She loved people.
That is why she did it. She did her
work beautifully. We will honor her
best by carrying forward the standard
she set.
Rest well, dear Tatum. You are
missed, you are remembered, and you
will never be forgotten.
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, I yield back the balance of
my time.
f

b 1850
APPLAUDING PRESIDENT
ZELENSKYY’S ADDRESS IN DAVOS
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Ms. KAPTUR of
Ohio was recognized for 30 minutes.)

PO 00000

Frm 00169

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, please
allow me to begin by applauding President Zelenskyy of Ukraine on his exceptional and historic remarks in
Davos, Switzerland, earlier today.
I heard an astoundingly unapologetic
plea by a new world leader whose remarks resounded across our globe as he
championed the cause of liberty in our
modern era.
Despite his own nation being bordered by tyranny, on almost all sides,
rooted in Russia and all of its repressed
client states, he raised his valiant
voice strong and clear before the free
world’s leaders.
They all know that today’s spider
web of tyranny is spinning and stretching its ugly net from Russia to Brazil,
India, North Korea, and South Africa,
seeking a global necklace of repression
and domination.
Yet, at Davos today stood the
unvanquished, courageous leader of the
poorest and most embattled nation in
Europe. On behalf of his valorous people, he delivered his eloquent plea.
Bravo,
President
Volodymyr
Zelenskyy. You singlehandedly challenged the scions of the global order.
Your firm supplication and urgent request for liberty were extraordinary,
rising far above global niceties.
You delivered the raw choice, as our
own Nation’s Founders did: Liberty or
tyranny?
Your clear invitation for these leaders to choose forward hangs in the balance, and your plea is historic, passionate, soulful, inspiring not just
world leaders but people everywhere as
they weigh recalibrating the dial for
liberty.
It is your voice that history will remember, rising to energize our world
forward from inside the grim, fierce
cauldron of struggle that is Ukraine.
For any freedom lover to miss your
message would be a tragedy, for if your
words, coupled with the ongoing martyrdom of your people, do not give rise
to crescendos of applause and recommitment, then will liberty cede its
worth to dictators, charlatans, plunderers, and fools?
Your call is to bold leadership from a
new generation of freedom lovers. Let
us all rise to answer that call. Freedom
means never surrender.
Bravo, Ukraine. Bravo, President
Volodymyr Zelenskyy. You inspired
freedom lovers across our globe.
JD VANCE VISITS TOLEDO

Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, on another front, today, Vice President JD
VANCE traveled to Toledo, Ohio. He
came to talk about the Trump administration’s so-called record to bring jobs
and help grow manufacturing in our region.
This came as quite a surprise to me.
Indeed, his words were empty because
his administration’s reckless tariffs
and disastrous trade wars have increased manufacturing job losses not
just in our region of Ohio but across
our Nation.
The Wall Street Journal documents
that, over the last year, manufacturing

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.121

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1344

unemployment has risen in our country by 68,000 more unemployed workers. You can’t Make America Great
Again unless you restore American
manufacturing on our home soil.
The Trump administration’s reckless
tariffs and disastrous trade wars are
straining the pocketbooks of our workers, farmers, and consumers. Prices
keep rising for everything—food, housing, utility bills, lumber, and cars. This
is true across the entirety of our northwest Ohio region, in both urban and
rural communities.
Vice President VANCE says he is now
interested in lowering drug prices, but
his party consistently voted against
those efforts, which were championed
under a prior Democratic administration. I know because I voted to help
cap insulin costs at $35 a month for
seniors on Medicare. I voted for prescription drug negotiations that are
saving seniors thousands of dollars as
we speak here tonight.
Unsurprisingly, the Vice President
avoided discussing the awful, unwise
decisions by his administration to rip
away almost $150 million from the city
that he was in by taking away $45 million from the Libbey Glass Company to
purchase two new glass furnaces that
were to compete against Chinese, Mexican, and French producers. We are
known as The Glass City. He took it
away. He didn’t bring us anything; he
took it away. The money evaporated.
Even though Congress had passed it—it
had all been vetted and everything—
they took it away. That hurts a manufacturing company which is a lodestar
company in our community.
Then, his administration canceled—
are you ready for this?—$57 million
more for another manufacturing company, Owens-Illinois, which competes
globally.
Then, if that wasn’t enough, they
canceled over $16 million for our local
Kraft Heinz facility in the agricultural
sector to compete against foreign products.
Another $28.5 million was taken away
from our region via rescissions over the
summer for major repair work in the
heart of our city on Front and Main
Street, on the side of the river that he
traveled to. The streets he rode over
should have been repaved, but they
took away the money. He didn’t mention them because he helped cancel
them.
That is over $146 million that would
have helped to invest in new possibilities to modernize our entire region.
Those investments were critical to
American manufacturing, with new-age
furnaces and technology, not only to
compete with foreign glass producers
but also to help reduce emissions here
at home for the people who work in
those plants and to make work safer
for our workers. How would you like to
sit in front of a 98-degree furnace all
day long?
Now, the administration has announced plans to eliminate $14.6 million in Ohio from the Ohio Manufac-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

10:20 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

turing Extension Partnership, which
has launched dozens of small and
midsized regional food businesses driven by the creativity of our people. The
U.S. Department of Commerce used to
care about those businesses, the small,
creative new launches, like Willy’s
Fresh Salsa, which just got into WinnDixie. That was invented by a gentleman who came from Toledo. There is
also Gertie’s Premium BBQ Sauce.
That is a product on our shelves created through that program to create
wealth, opportunities, and jobs.
So many more, dozens and dozens of
these companies, have been created,
and jobs. Why destroy something that
is working? Can somebody tell me how
else do we sprout and grow our local
economies?
I thought when the Vice President
said he was coming to Toledo, he might
help announce the $20 million in Department of Transportation RAISE
funds, which had been awarded to improve connectivity in Toledo’s heart, in
our Junction neighborhood, in the
downtown, in the heart of our city on
both sides of our Grand Maumee River,
but that announcement never came.
If this administration really wants to
help Toledo, they better stop driving
backward. Mr. Vice President, can you
please bring our check which the administration owes us?
All of these awards were passed by
Congress, authorized, appropriated, and
signed into law. Our community should
never be shortchanged. Our taxpayers
send their dollars here. They have a
right to get them back. Our people
work too hard for a living. We need to
respect them, and we need to build our
communities forward, not backward.
YEAR-ROUND E–15

Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I now
turn to a very important issue that
arose today because of something that
happened with Speaker JOHNSON.
America’s farmers are hurting. They
need every bit of help Congress can deliver. So do truckers and working families paying more for groceries and at
the pump just to haul goods, get to
work, and move around their communities. Prices are going up, not just in
America’s heartland, but across our
great country.
b 1900
Republican leadership today had a
chance to authorize year-round E15, a
commonsense blend of ethanol and gasoline, but guess what. They walked
away from it again.
Instead, and I can tell you this for
the farmers I represent, half their income comes from raising grains that go
into fuels. Without that market, they
wouldn’t exist.
This is serious business for agricultural America, and instead, Speaker
JOHNSON has set up another delay, a
council set to report back within another month on next steps.
Next steps on what? We want to
make E15 year-round. That is not too
complicated. That may sound like

PO 00000

Frm 00170

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

progress with another task force, but
we don’t really need it.
Farmers want E15 year-round. They
can’t keep punting our farmers up
field. The time to act is now. The solution is within their hands. Why did
they delay?
Let’s hope this process the Speaker
has now set up for another month or 6
weeks is not just another fig leaf for
more delay. Year-round E15 sales protect our small refineries, too.
Can Congress achieve this so-called
compromise? Ohio farmers and refiners
are already hurting. Let’s stand up for
biofuels and for our farmers. Surely,
the hardworking farmers across all of
the counties I represent would benefit.
What America makes and grows,
makes and grows America. Let me just
say to the Speaker, ‘‘please, shake a
leg.’’
HONORING STEVEN D. FOUGHT

Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I will
move on now to remember someone
that was an extraordinary American.
It is my great privilege, Mr. Speaker,
to offer deepest gratitude on behalf of
Ohioans and Americans as we recognize
the life of an honored and indefatigable
public servant in the truest sense.
Steven D. Fought was born in Rapid
City, South Dakota, on June 2, 1954,
and passed recently at 71 years young.
He passed from this life after a truly
valiant final fight, on January 10, 2026,
in Nebo, North Carolina, surrounded by
his beloved family.
Steve was a precious and trusted
friend, a brilliant adviser and public
servant, incorruptible, compassionate,
acerbic, and funny all at the same
time, with a twinkle in his eye, you
can just see it, and hearty laugh to tie
it all up with a bow.
One colleague described him as the
most intelligent, frustrating, hardest
working, disorganized, nicest person
they ever had the pleasure and honor
to work with.
Steve Fought truly loved his country
and the democratic process. He was always both an ardent participant and
learned scholar of democracy. He floated in books. Steve was a lifelong student, earning degrees in literature, history, business administration, and law.
He never stopped learning.
He loved baseball. Do not get in his
way when there is a baseball around
and basketball, as well. He was at one
time the ‘‘beloved Little League coach
of Celina, Ohio.’’
He was always reading, always learning. He could call up any fact. He conversed with the depth of knowledge
which at times was actually astounding.
Steve Fought began his professional
career as a newspaper reporter. He paid
attention to details, and he followed
that pursuit with decades in public
service, first with the State of Ohio
and then with the United States Congress.
He served under then-Secretary of
State Sherrod Brown in Columbus, our
capital, and would later serve in his office for a decade here in this House. It

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.123

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

January 22, 2026

was during that time that alongside
myself, Sherrod, and others that Steve
helped lead the consequential fight
against NAFTA on this very floor, the
North American Free Trade Agreement, which was anything but free to
America’s workers and farmers. We all
knew the harm it would do to the region we call home. It was a worthy and
passionate fight then. We were proven
to be right many times over since when
we go to the hollowed out cities and
towns of our country. I just feel so honored that he was a part of that great
struggle for America’s people.
Following his service with Sherrod
Brown, Steve would join our office
where he became a trusted adviser,
serving as our legislative director for 5
years and then transitioning to communications director for nearly a decade.
Even in retirement, he continued in
public service at the local level for the
city of Toledo. He even ran for Congress in a long-shot bid to succeed the
retiring Republican Speaker of the
House John Boehner.
Though he came up short, Steve believed that everyone deserved a choice
and that no one should receive a rubber-stamped, gerrymandered seat in
Congress without having to work for it.
He always fought the good fight. His
favorite music was Aaron Copland’s
‘‘Fanfare for the Common Man.’’ Steve
loved this land and worked to preserve
its future. This was embodied in legislation he drafted to add an international designation to the Detroit
River and Ottawa National Wildlife
Refuges, which border our dear neighbor to the north, Canada.
He was an avid proponent for countless species and preserving unspoiled
lands. Steve helped us to cement our
region as the home of the biggest week
in American birding, which today attracts birders from around the globe.
To the last, he was an active participant in the American experiment. He
wrote Op-Eds and organized, kept reading and studying, even through his
final, difficult illnesses.
Steve Fought’s life is beautifully
summed up by his nephew: ‘‘Steve was
many things to many people and had a
knack for somehow being everywhere
all at once. In addition to being a public servant, he was a deep thinker and
conversationalist, a world traveler who
visited 41 different countries, a voracious reader and eternal student, a bighearted hellion, an old hippie who
loved rock and roll and bluegrass
music, a Zags basketball fanatic, and a
passionate champion for underdogs everywhere. But most of all, until the
very end, Steve was an outspoken believer in the decency and value of common people, the collective public good,
and the principles of democracy, diversity, and equality. He was loved deeply
by his family, his friends, his associates from work, and will be severely
missed.’’
Our Nation expresses deepest gratitude for the selfless service of Steve

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:43 Jan 23, 2026

H1345

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Fought, his true friendship, his humanity, and his abiding and honorable service. We celebrate the difference he
made with a lifetime of intention and
of active citizenship for this beautiful
land and our people.
Those who know him can rest assured they will never ever meet his
likes again. May God protect him,
bring him peace, and allow his spirit to
soar with the eagles.
Mr. Speaker, thank you for allowing
me to enter this into the RECORD.
b 1910
HONORING ROBERT ‘‘REX’’ BAUMGARTNER

Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
honor Robert ‘‘Rex’’ Baumgartner, a
true American hero, a man of the law.
Rex embodied the very best of our Nation: honor, respect, bravery, duty, and
unwavering courage.
Born in east Toledo, Rex answered
the call to serve early, joining the
United States Air Force and serving as
an air policeman and sentry dog handler around the globe. He later dedicated over four decades to the Toledo
Police Department.
His instincts, integrity, and fearless
commitment to justice as a detective
made our community safer and stronger. His work earned him countless honors including induction into the Birmingham Hall of Fame and the National Law Enforcement Officer Hall of
Fame.
Even after retiring, he continued to
serve, spending another 15 years at the
Lucas County Prosecutor’s Office, focusing on protecting the elderly from
crime. He retired at the young age of
83. He truly made a difference in a lifetime of extraordinary public service.
Yet, Rex’s greatest legacy was the
love he poured into his family and
community. He was a mentor, a coach,
a storyteller, and a steady hand. He
was always present, always giving, always leading with heart.
For over 30 years, Papa Rex made
Halloween camping trips legendary.
From silly costumes to spooky decorations, he poured his heart into making
those weekends memorable. They became
traditions
that
his
kids,
grandkids, and now great-grandkids
will carry on for years to come.
Beyond all the arrests, titles, and
awards, Rex was wise. He told the best
stories, made everyone laugh until
they cried, always showed up when he
was needed most, and taught everyone
how to live with integrity, humor, and
genuine heart.
With his beloved wife of 62 years,
Linda; his children, Debbie, Patti, Robert, and Julie; 13 grandchildren; 10
great-grandchildren;
and
countless
other family and friends who loved him
dearly, I join to celebrate a life of purpose and courage well-lived. May his
example forever inspire all those who
knew him.
I thank the Speaker for allowing me
to enter his life into the RECORD.
CELEBRATING THE LIFE OF WILLIAM ‘‘BILL’’ J.
DARAH, JR.

Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
celebrate the life of William ‘‘Bill’’ J.

PO 00000

Frm 00171

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Darah, Jr., of northwest Ohio, a husband, father, grandfather, and Toledo
businessman.
Bill Darah embodied the American
Dream through hard work, integrity,
and devotion to family. For more than
four decades, this truly good man
helped clothe our police officers, firefighters, workers, building Superior
Uniform Sales with grit, wisdom, and a
gift for bringing people together.
He was so friendly. He was a natural
leader, a storyteller, and a man whose
word mattered.
Bill’s life was deeply rooted in faith,
in heritage, and in routine, whether it
was at St. Elias church, the Monday
cousins’ lunch he sustained for 45
years, or cheering for the Yankees, the
Rockets, and the Buckeyes.
Yet, at the center of everything was
his family. His pride in his family was
unmistakable. They include his wife,
Amira; his daughters, Natalie and
Alyssa; and his grandchildren.
This week, Bill would have celebrated his 76th birthday. Today, we
wish him in memoriam a happy birthday. We honor a life truly well-lived.
May his memory be eternal.
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to enter his
story into the RECORD.
HONORING SYDNEY BOISSELLE

Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I rise tonight with a heavy heart and deep
gratitude to remember Sydney M.
Boisselle, a young woman whose life
proved that impact is not measured in
years but in courage, character, and
how we lift others.
Sydney shattered expectations. She
became a leader in the International
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers
Local 8, a teacher in the trades, a voice
for women, and a standard-bearer for
excellence. She worked hard, spoke
honestly, laughed loudly, and made
room for others to grow. She was, as
all those who loved her say, pint-sized
and full of spice, unforgettable in every
way.
Above all, Sydney loved fiercely: her
family; her friends; her dog, Waylon;
and the community she served. In her
final act, she gave the gift of life itself
through organ donation, offering hope
to families she would never meet.
We honor the strength of her family
who made this courageous decision
with love and grace. Sydney’s passing
reminds us that even in sorrow, goodness endures. One life lived fully and
generously can change the lives of
many.
Sydney Boisselle was a shero to
working people and to so many who
came to know her. May her name be
honored forever. I thank the Speaker
for allowing me to enter her story into
the RECORD.
HONORING THE LIFE OF TIMOTHY HAASE

Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
honor the life of Timothy Haase, a devoted son, brother, caregiver, and the
steady heart of Dino’s Family Restaurant in Maumee. I know Dino defines family not just as his family but
the family he created, as he created

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.125

H22JAPT1

H1346

community in Maumee and the surrounding neighborhoods.
For more than two decades, Tim
showed up before dawn, fed neighbors
with kindness, and reminded us that
dignity lives in every service. His tragic loss on New Year’s Eve has left an
empty chair at the counter and a deeper ache in a community that loved him
and that he helped build, a community
of people.
We also honor the family that Dino’s
created. In a simple diner, friendships
were forged, stories were shared, and
strangers became regulars. A community was brought closer together.
Owner Dean Yakumithis and his
team built a place where hard work
mattered. Coffee stayed warm. People
felt seen and appreciated. Though the
doors have now closed, the spirit of
that table endures in every single life
that Tim touched. There were thousands.
Let us keep Tim’s memory alive by
caring for one another, watching out
for our neighbors, and cherishing the
small places that bind a town together.
Every person is a part of that necklace
of life in America. May his light guide
us forward.
On behalf of northwest Ohio, we offer
gratitude, prayers, and an enduring
promise to remember.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

FUNDAMENTALLY CHANGING
IMMIGRATION
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. GROTHMAN of
Wisconsin was recognized for 30 minutes.)
Mr. GROTHMAN. Mr. Speaker, we
will take about 11⁄2 weeks off now, as
we go back to our districts, meet our
constituents, and do our factory tours.
Prior to leaving, I think it is important one more time to address what I
think is the most significant issue this
Congress and next Congress and that
this President and the next President
is going to have to deal with. How we
address this issue will determine
whether
America
fundamentally
changes or not. That issue is immigration.
We see it on the TV every night. We
see the obnoxiousness going on in a
church in Minneapolis. We see the horror and unfortunate death of a woman
who was protesting. There are demonstrations all around the country.
First of all, let’s define the current
situation. Right now in America, every
year about 800,000 people are naturalized. We don’t talk about that enough.
We spend all the time talking about
people who are sneaking into this
country. We don’t talk about the fact
that over 800,000 people every year become new citizens.
In addition to that 800,000 new citizens, 500,000 people come here on work
visas. Another 500,000 come here on student visas. People being what they are,
many of these people on visas stay in
the United States anyway.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

08:43 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

In addition to that, the United States
is one of the few countries in the world
in which we have birthright citizenship. We have new citizens. If a woman
from China flies into San Diego, has a
child, and comes back, the way we are
interpreting the law right now—which,
of course, is wrong—but the way we interpret it is that child becomes a U.S.
citizen.
When you look at all the ways you
can become citizens, it is not surprising that today over 15 percent of
the people in the United States of
America were born abroad. That is an
all-time high. As we analyze what we
have to do on this situation, we ought
to remember: If we do nothing, we are
already at an all-time high in the number of people who are in the United
States who were not born here.
b 1920
As far as the over 800,000 who were
naturalized, that is about four times
what it was when I was a child in the
1960s. Again, we have nobody to apologize to as we are not letting people into
the country. There are four times as
many people being let into the country
as when I was a child.
We just got done with President Joe
Biden, and, of course, we don’t keep
track of the exact numbers, but he was
allowing about 8 to 10 million people
into the country. In addition to all of
these other people, 8 to 10 million people were being allowed into the country, crossing our southern border illegally.
What do we do about this situation as
we are being flooded with people from
other countries?
First of all, we have to worry that
the people coming here are not what
John Adams said should be required to
come here. They are not necessarily a
moral and religious people. They may
not respect our Constitution. When
they eventually participate in our elections, will they vote for the limited
government that our forefathers felt
that we needed, a limited government
that is required?
Most countries built on elections
wind up collapsing, and they collapsed
because people go to the polls and just
say: What can my government do for
me? I will quote JOHN KENNEDY here as
far as what he felt we needed in this
country. He said: ‘‘Ask not what your
country will do for you—ask what you
can do for your country.’’
Those are the type of people we need
at the polling booth. Unfortunately,
over time—and I am including carpet
welfare in this as much as anything—
we have more and more citizens when
they vote saying: What will you give
me? Are you going to give me more
food? Are you going to give me free
medical care? Are you going to give me
free daycare?
In other words, what they do is they
want the government to give them
more money that they didn’t earn on
their own. That would be the end of
America if these are the type of immigrants we are getting in.

PO 00000

Frm 00172

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

I also want to point out that when we
look at the people coming here, some
of our inflammatory people talk about
racism. I hate it when they talk about
racism, but I do want to point out that,
now, when you look at people who are
naturalized who come in here, I want
to rattle off the ten most common
countries that citizens become naturalized from: One, Mexico; two, India;
three, Philippines; four, Dominican Republic; five, Cuba; six, Vietnam; seven,
China; eight, El Salvador; nine, Jamaica; and ten, Colombia.
Do you notice anything about those
ten countries? Not one of those countries are sending us immigrants who
are primarily European in nature. I
should maybe qualify that. For whatever reason, the diversity bureaucrats
have decided to tell us that people, say,
from Cuba or the Dominican Republic
are not European.
I have always felt it was odd the way
they define this. You can have a family
who moves here from Spain to Cuba,
hangs around Cuba for 80 years. They
come to the United States, and they
are not considered primarily European
even though their ancestry is in Europe.
In any event, the way we consider
things now, none of the top ten are primarily European. As far as people saying that we have this horribly racist
country, I think it would be odd for a
racist country to let the ten most common nationalities to come here, all
what our leftwing friends would call
people of color.
In any event, we have to ask ourselves: How do we handle this huge influx of people coming into the country?
If people come here and lie and say
that they are coming here for asylum,
it seems to me that the only alternative is to remove them, or we have
no immigration law, right?
If the word gets out that you come to
the United States and, as long as you
don’t break laws, as long as you are not
an armed robber, as long as you are not
a drug dealer, you can stay here forever, everybody will come here. That is
like having no immigration law at all.
In any event, right now, we have the
bizarre situation in which people are
deciding that we don’t have to enforce
our current immigration laws. We have
people like—I am from Wisconsin—the
Governor of Illinois and the Governor
of Minnesota, in essence, saying that
we do not want ICE in our States.
Same thing with the ridiculous mayor
of Minnesota.
What would happen if the word got
out that, if you come illegally into the
United States, all you have to do is
find your way into Illinois or Minnesota or perhaps New York or California, and the immigration laws will
not be enforced?
I will tell you what would happen.
What would happen is, in a given period of time, I think we would find ourselves—I am sure it would be easy to
find 100 million Chinese who would
come here; 100 million people from

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.126

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

H1347

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

India could come here; or 100 million
people from Africa would come here.
America would permanently change. It
would change very quickly if we respected the preposterous positions of
the Governor of Minnesota.
In order to preserve our country, we
have to limit the number of new citizens at 800,000, or maybe even less.
It is scary that we have so many citizens who are so blind that they can’t
see that we are losing our country. If
we allow unlimited immigration in the
country, that is exactly what would
happen.
I should also point out that things
are different than they were 60 years
ago. When I was a child and they
showed pictures of countries abroad,
you would see starving children. You
would look at their stomachs.
Nowadays, the amount of poverty in
the Third World is a fraction of what it
used to be. In some of the poorer countries of the world, we have the same
problem as we do with the poor of this
country. They are obese.
Okay. It amazes me sometimes when
you look at the TV and they are showing other countries around the globe,
how they have high-rise buildings in
the background. I am sure they are not
as wealthy as, say, New York City, but
they clearly are not poor as we thought
of poor 60 years ago. These people frequently have more than enough money.
So the question is what to do, and
that is why I think it is the biggest
problem that we have in America. If
people like the Governor of Minnesota
or the Governor of Illinois or the Governor of California get their way, the
America that we are used to is going to
disappear, and it will be replaced by
people who may not be protecting our

country or keeping the current law or
the current Constitution or the attitude of less government going.
We are almost certainly going to get
people who turn America into the
countries they came from, countries in
which there is socialism, in which you
have socialists; countries in which
elections become contests of who are
you going to give to more? America
will become not only poorer, but America will become much less free.
We must enforce our immigration
laws. It is going to be messy in some
cases, particularly because we have
horrible mayors and horrible Governors who want to ignore our laws.
They want to fundamentally change
America, but our President, whoever
that President is, has to have the courage and the moral steel to stand up to
these people and remove people who
don’t belong here.
Anybody who feels guilty about that,
again, I remind you: 800,000 people a
year, almost all what liberals refer to
as people of color, are coming here already. We have nothing to apologize for
if we hold the number of people here to
those numbers.
b 1930
There are some people who feel that
we need more people here for our
farms, more people here for our hotels,
more people here for our factories. If
that is true, Congress can expand the
number of work visas that are available, but it doesn’t mean we open up
the floodgates of the southern border
and whoever can come here should be
able to come here.
Part of the problem as well, in addition to bad mayors and bad Governors,
is bad clergy. I think they are appar-

ently not familiar what is in the Bible
as far as respecting the law. Every
country around the world has immigration laws. They have laws that have to
be respected. Unfortunately, we have
some clergy who, I guess, were bored
preaching about the Gospel, bored
preaching about God, and they have decided to adopt the leftwing orthodoxies
of let everybody come here. They, of
course, have a lot to answer to as well.
I challenge Americans at the polls,
when you look and see what issues
your Congressman or, even more, your
mayors or Governors are running on,
are you going to vote for people who
are going to keep our America great,
not people who are going to say no immigrants whatsoever—like I said, nationalizing 800,000 a year. Are you
going to elect people who are not going
to be foolish people who let an unlimited number of people come here? Because if we do that, America, the
America that we grew up in, is going to
be gone for our children. It is going to
be gone for our grandchildren.
In any event, that is, I think, the
most important issue today because if
we don’t win on that issue, our country
is done.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
f

ADJOURNMENT
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 13 of rule I, the House
stands adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow.
Thereupon (at 7 o’clock and 31 minutes p.m.), under its previous order, the
House adjourned until tomorrow, Friday, January 23, 2026, at 10 a.m.

h
EXPENDITURE
REPORTS
CONCERNING
OFFICIAL
FOREIGN
TRAVEL
Reports concerning the foreign currencies and U.S. dollars utilized for Of-

ficial Foreign Travel during the third
and fourth quarters of 2025, pursuant to
Public Law 95–384, are as follows:

REPORT OF EXPENDITURES FOR OFFICIAL FOREIGN TRAVEL, COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, EXPENDED BETWEEN OCT. 1 AND DEC. 31, 2025
Per diem 1

Date
Name of Member or employee

Country
Arrival

Foreign
currency

Departure

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Transportation
Foreign
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Other purposes
Foreign
currency

Total

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Foreign
currency

HOUSE COMMITTEES
Please Note: If there were no expenditures during the calendar quarter noted above, please check the box at right to so indicate and return. ◊
1 Per diem constitutes lodging and meals.
2 If foreign currency is used, enter U.S. dollar equivalent; if U.S. currency is used, enter amount expended.

HON. JODEY C. ARRINGTON, Jan. 7, 2026.

REPORT OF EXPENDITURES FOR OFFICIAL FOREIGN TRAVEL, COMMITTEE ON ETHICS, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, EXPANDED BETWEEN OCT. 1 AND DEC. 31, 2025
Per diem 1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Date
Name of Member or employee

Country
Arrival

Foreign
currency

Departure

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Transportation
Foreign
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Other purposes
Foreign
currency

Total

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Foreign
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

HOUSE COMMITTEES
Please Note: If there were no expenditures during the calendar quarter noted above, please check the box at right to so indicate and return. ◊
1 Per diem constitutes lodging and meals.
2 If foreign currency is used, enter U.S. dollar equivalent; if U.S. currency is used, enter amount expended.

HON. MICHAEL GUEST, Jan. 7, 2026.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:43 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00173

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 8634

E:\CR\FM\K22JA7.128

H22JAPT1

H1348

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

REPORT OF EXPENDITURES FOR OFFICIAL FOREIGN TRAVEL, COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, EXPENDED BETWEEN OCT. 1 AND DEC. 31, 2025
Per diem 1

Date
Name of Member or employee

Country
Arrival

Foreign
currency

Departure

Transportation

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Foreign
currency

Other purposes
Foreign
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Total
U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Foreign
currency

HOUSE COMMITTEES
Please Note: If there were no expenditures during the calendar quarter noted above, please check the box at right to so indicate and return. ◊
1 Per diem constitutes lodging and meals.
2 If foreign currency is used, enter U.S. dollar equivalent; if U.S. currency is used, enter amount expended.

HON. ANDREW R. GARBARINO, Jan. 7, 2026.

REPORT OF EXPENDITURES FOR OFFICIAL FOREIGN TRAVEL, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, EXPENDED BETWEEN OCT. 1 AND DEC. 31, 2025
Per diem 1

Date
Name of Member or employee

Country
Arrival

Foreign
currency

Departure

Transportation

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Foreign
currency

Other purposes
Foreign
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Total
U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Foreign
currency

HOUSE COMMITTEES
Please Note: If there were no expenditures during the calendar quarter noted above, please check the box at right to so indicate and return. ◊
1 Per diem constitutes lodging and meals.
2 If foreign currency is used, enter U.S. dollar equivalent; if U.S. currency is used, enter amount expended.

HON. BRUCE WESTERMAN, Jan. 5, 2026.

REPORT OF EXPENDITURES FOR OFFICIAL FOREIGN TRAVEL, PERMANENT SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, EXPENDED BETWEEN JULY 1 AND
SEPT. 30, 2025
Per diem 1

Date
Name of Member or Employee

Transportation

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Foreign
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Other purposes

Total

Foreign
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Foreign
currency

U.S. dollar
equivalent
or U.S.
currency 2

Country

Foreign
currency

8/2
8/2
8/2
8/7
8/7
8/7
8/7
8/7
8/7
8/7
8/7
8/7
8/16
8/16
8/16
8/22
8/22
8/22
8/27
8/27
8/21
8/21
8/21
8/28
8/28
8/28
8/28
8/22
8/22
8/22
8/22
8/29
8/29
8/29
8/29
8/29
9/27
9/27
9/27
9/27
9/27
9/27
9/27
9/27

South America ......................................
South America ......................................
South America ......................................
Europe ...................................................
Europe ...................................................
Europe ...................................................
Middle East ..........................................
Middle East ..........................................
Middle East ..........................................
Middle East ..........................................
Middle East ..........................................
Middle East ..........................................
South America ......................................
South America ......................................
South America ......................................
North America .......................................
North America .......................................
North America .......................................
Asia .......................................................
Asia .......................................................
South America ......................................
South America ......................................
South America ......................................
Asia .......................................................
Asia .......................................................
Asia .......................................................
Asia .......................................................
Asia .......................................................
Asia .......................................................
Asia .......................................................
Asia .......................................................
Middle East ..........................................
Middle East ..........................................
Middle East ..........................................
Middle East ..........................................
Middle East ..........................................
Africa ....................................................
Africa ....................................................
Africa ....................................................
Africa ....................................................
Middle East ..........................................
Middle East ..........................................
Middle East ..........................................
Middle East ..........................................

....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................

2,569.40
2,265.00
1,128.00
4,836.56
4,836.56
4,151.20
1,280.00
1,280.00
1,280.00
1,280.00
1,280.00
1,280.00
1,343.00
1,343.00
650.00
376.00
752.00
752.00
1,963.91
1,963.91
798.80
798.80
798.80
2,236.41
2,236.41
2,236.41
2,236.41
773.50
773.50
773.50
773.50
613.41
246.00
621.00
1,048.41
988.41
1,133.11
1,133.11
1,133.11
1,133.11
371.03
371.03
371.03
371.03

....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................

1,661.50
445.91
517.62
14,817.31
14,409.51
7,953.61
9,052.65
6,153.09
10,533.49
6,153.09
9,028.49
6,153.09
3,167.54
3,778.34
4,149.18
474.23
886.23
886.23
8,386.01
7,031.91
1,893.35
896.35
896.35
23,679.73
23,228.97
24,101.51
23,441.47
5,492.61
9,484.58
10,609.58
9,484.48
8,076.75
9,455.00
10,121.55
9,628.45
9,204.45
12,347.43
11,107.81
11,142.81
11,142.81
10,886.91
16,122.01
17,171.51
20,978.69

....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................

....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................

....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................

....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................

.................

...............................................................

....................

60,580.37

....................

406,234.19

....................

....................

....................

466,814.56

Arrival

Departure

Hillary Lassiter ........................................................
Tara Westby .............................................................
Emelie Englehart .....................................................
Hon. Dan Crenshaw .................................................
Rick Trimble ............................................................
Troy Nienberg ...........................................................
Hon. Rick Crawford .................................................
Griffin Decker ..........................................................
Hon. Ronny Jackson .................................................
Hank Wilson .............................................................
Hon. Josh Gottheimer ..............................................
Edyt Dickstein ..........................................................
Tara Westby .............................................................
John Laufer ..............................................................
Alice McIntosh .........................................................
Hon. Dan Crenshaw .................................................
Hillary Lassiter ........................................................
Ryan Torgrimson ......................................................
Ann Wagner .............................................................
Kelli Parks ...............................................................
Hon. Rick Crawford .................................................
Jonah Shumate ........................................................
Henry Wilson ............................................................
Hon. Brian Fitzpatrick .............................................
Hon. Chrissy Houlahan ............................................
Kathryn King ............................................................
Emily Ashbridge .......................................................
Hon. Jimmy Gomez ..................................................
Jae Jo .......................................................................
Tara Westby .............................................................
Jim Robertson ..........................................................
Hon. Darin LaHood ..................................................
Hon. Steve Cohen ....................................................
Edyt Dickstein ..........................................................
Bryon Burks .............................................................
Lorelei Legg .............................................................
Hon. Stacey Plaskett ...............................................
Will Evans ................................................................
Hillary Lassiter ........................................................
Madison Aston .........................................................
Hon. Ronny Jackson .................................................
Hon. Josh Gottheimer ..............................................
Kathryn King ............................................................
John Laufer ..............................................................

7/24
7/24
7/24
7/24
7/24
7/24
8/4
8/4
8/4
8/4
8/4
8/4
8/10
8/10
8/10
8/17
8/17
8/17
8/18
8/18
8/18
8/18
8/18
8/18
8/18
8/18
8/18
8/19
8/19
8/19
8/19
8/22
8/22
8/22
8/22
8/22
9/20
9/20
9/20
9/20
9/23
9/23
9/23
9/23

Total ...........................................................

.............

In accordance with title 22 United States Code Section 1754(b)(2), information as would identify the foreign countries in which Committee Members and Staff have traveled is omitted.
1 Per diem constitutes lodging and meals.
2 If foreign currency is used, enter U.S. dollar equivalent; if U.S. currency is used, enter amount expended.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

h

EXECUTIVE COMMUNICATIONS,
ETC.
Under clause 2 of rule XIV, executive
communications were taken from the
Speaker’s table and referred as follows:
EC–2751. A communication from the President of the United States, transmitting notification that the national emergency with
respect to the widespread humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan and the potential for a
deepening economic collapse in Afghanistan

VerDate Sep 11 2014

10:20 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

declared in Executive Order 14064 of February 11, 2022, is to continue in effect beyond
February 11, 2026, pursuant to 50 U.S.C.
1622(d); Public Law 94-412, Sec. 202(d); (90
Stat. 1255) (H. Doc. No. 119-129); jointly to the
Committees on Financial Services and Foreign Affairs, and ordered to be printed.
EC–2752. A communication from the President of the United States, transmitting notification that the national emergency with
respect to the International Criminal Court
declared in Executive Order 14203 of Feb-

PO 00000

Frm 00174

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

HON. ERIC. A. ‘‘RICK’’ CRAWFORD, Jan. 6, 2026.

ruary 6, 2025, is to continue in effect beyond
February 6, 2026, pursuant to 50 U.S.C.
1622(d); Public Law 94-412, Sec. 202(d); (90
Stat. 1255) (H. Doc. No. 119-128); jointly to the
Committees on the Judiciary and Foreign
Affairs, and ordered to be printed.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.052

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES ON
PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XIII, reports of
committees were delivered to the Clerk
for printing and reference to the proper
calendar, as follows:
Ms. FOXX: Committee on Rules. House
Resolution 1014. Resolution providing for
consideration of the bill (H.R. 7148) making
further consolidated appropriations for the
fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for
other purposes; providing for consideration
of the bill (H.R. 7147) making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes; and for other purposes (Rept. 119–462).
Referred to the House Calendar.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XII, public
bills and resolutions of the following
titles were introduced and severally referred, as follows:
By Mr. ALLEN:
H.R. 7195. A bill to provide financial assistance to forest product harvesting and hauling businesses impacted by a significant
market disruption, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Agriculture.
By Mr. BARRETT (for himself and Mr.
CRAWFORD):
H.R. 7196. A bill to amend the District of
Columbia Home Rule Act to prohibit the
Council of the District of Columbia from enacting any law to permit euthanasia and assisted suicide in the District of Columbia,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform.
By Mr. BELL (for himself and Mr.
MANNION):
H.R. 7197. A bill to amend Public Law 117169 to improve access to home energy-efficiency rebates for working families, renters,
and owners of older homes, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
By Mr. BERA (for himself, Mr. BACON,
Mr. PETERS, and Mr. JOYCE of Pennsylvania):
H.R. 7198. A bill to amend the Public
Health Service Act with respect to the designation of general surgery shortage areas,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. BERGMAN (for himself, Ms.
BUDZINSKI, Mr. GOLDEN of Maine, Ms.
MALLIOTAKIS, Mr. SELF, Ms. LEE of
Nevada, Mr. BACON, Mr. NEGUSE, Mr.
DESJARLAIS, Mr. MAST, Mr. BAIRD,
and Ms. PETTERSEN):
H.R. 7199. A bill to amend title 38, United
States Code, to provide a burial allowance
for certain veterans who die at home while
in receipt of hospice care furnished by the
Department of Veterans Affairs; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Mr. BIGGS of Arizona:
H.R. 7200. A bill to require verification of
employment authorization through the EVerify Program as a condition of issuance or
renewal of a commercial driver’s license; to
the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
By Ms. BYNUM:
H.R. 7201. A bill to establish a program to
fill critical rural workforce shortages
through an education assistance and loan repayment in exchange for service in designated rural areas, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Agriculture, and in addition to the Committee on Education and
Workforce, for a period to be subsequently
determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall with-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:43 Jan 23, 2026

H1349

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

in the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Ms. BYNUM:
H.R. 7202. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Education to carry out a grant program to
support signing and retention bonuses for
teachers in rural schools, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Education and
Workforce.
By Ms. BYNUM:
H.R. 7203. A bill to establish a grant program for States to support individuals participating in semiconductor-related workforce programs, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Education and Workforce,
and in addition to the Committee on Ways
and Means, for a period to be subsequently
determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Ms. BYNUM:
H.R. 7204. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Transportation to establish a grant program
to increase the use of stop-arm safety camera technology on schoolbuses, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, and in addition to
the Committee on Education and Workforce,
for a period to be subsequently determined
by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Ms. BYNUM:
H.R. 7205. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to permit fees for admissions applications to higher education institutions to be paid from a 529 plan, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Ways
and Means.
By Ms. CRAIG (for herself, Mr. DAVID
SCOTT of Georgia, Mr. COSTA, Ms.
ADAMS, Mrs. HAYES, Ms. BROWN, Ms.
SALINAS, Ms. TOKUDA, Ms. BUDZINSKI,
Mr. SORENSEN, Mr. VASQUEZ, Mr.
JACKSON of Illinois, Mr. THANEDAR,
Mr. GRAY, Ms. MCDONALD RIVET, Mr.
FIGURES, Mr. VINDMAN, Mr. RILEY of
New York, Mr. MANNION, Mrs.
DELANEY,
and
Mr.
MCCLAIN
CARBAJAL):
H.R. 7206. A bill to provide for economic assistance to agricultural producers, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Agriculture, and in addition to the Committees
on Ways and Means, and the Budget, for a period to be subsequently determined by the
Speaker, in each case for consideration of
such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Ms. CRAIG:
H.R. 7207. A bill to amend title 5, United
States Code, to require the President and the
Vice President to disclose financial interests
and divest of any financial interest posing a
potential conflict of interest, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform, and in addition to the
Committee on the Judiciary, for a period to
be subsequently determined by the Speaker,
in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. CRENSHAW:
H.R. 7208. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Commerce to submit a report assessing
vulnerabilities to the electric grid in the
United States from certain Internet-connected devices and applications, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Energy
and Commerce, and in addition to the Committees on Foreign Affairs, Oversight and
Government Reform, Ways and Means, Intelligence (Permanent Select), and Homeland
Security, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.

PO 00000

Frm 00175

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

By Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania (for herself and Mr. MORAN):
H.R. 7209. A bill to create an administrative subpoena process to assist copyright
owners in determining which of their copyrighted works have been used in the training
of artificial intelligence models; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Mr. FITZPATRICK (for himself and
Ms. PEREZ):
H.R. 7210. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to exclude certain income
of law enforcement officers from gross income; to the Committee on Ways and Means.
By Mr. GRIFFITH:
H.R. 7211. A bill to authorize the President
to award the Medal of Honor to John W. Ripley for acts of valor during the Vietnam War,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Armed Services.
By Mr. GRIFFITH (for himself and Mr.
VEASEY):
H.R. 7212. A bill to amend the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to provide for
the regulation of cannabinoid hemp products, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. GROTHMAN (for himself, Mr.
PERRY, Ms. BOEBERT, and Ms. MACE):
H.R. 7213. A bill to restrict certain Federal
assistance benefits to individuals verified to
be citizens of the United States; to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
By Mr. HARDER of California:
H.R. 7214. A bill to amend the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 to establish a Federal standard relating to a twoyear lobbying ban; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. HARDER of California (for himself and Mr. FITZPATRICK):
H.R. 7215. A bill to require the Director of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, and
the Federal Trade Commission to undertake
a governmentwide effort to counter scams,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
the Judiciary, and in addition to the Committees on Energy and Commerce, and Financial Services, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each
case for consideration of such provisions as
fall within the jurisdiction of the committee
concerned.
By Mr. KEAN (for himself and Mr.
MACKENZIE):
H.R. 7216. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to establish the housing affordability credit; to the Committee on Ways
and Means.
By Mr. LATIMER:
H.R. 7217. A bill to amend the Small Business Act to extend and modify the assistance
for administrative, oversight, and contract
processing costs for the SBIR and STTR programs, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Small Business, and in addition to
the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within
the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. LAWLER:
H.R. 7218. A bill to require artificial intelligence
chatbots
to
implement
age
verification measures and establish certain
protections for minor users, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce.
By Mr. LAWLER:
H.R. 7219. A bill to require the congressional districts established by a State to
meet certain requirements, to prohibit
States from carrying out more than one congressional redistricting after a decennial
census and apportionment, to exclude aliens
without lawful status under the immigration

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.017

H22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H1350

laws from number of persons used to determine apportionment of representatives and
number of electoral votes, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary,
and in addition to the Committees on Oversight and Government Reform, and House
Administration, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each
case for consideration of such provisions as
fall within the jurisdiction of the committee
concerned.
By Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania (for herself and Mr. JACKSON of Illinois):
H.R. 7220. A bill to require the public disclosure of COINTELPRO records, to establish a COINTELPRO Records Collection, and
to establish the COINTELPRO Records Review Board, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Oversight and Government
Reform, and in addition to the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure, for a period to be subsequently determined by the
Speaker, in each case for consideration of
such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mrs. LUNA:
H.R. 7221. A bill to amend the Investment
Company Act of 1940 to prohibit certain
large private funds and registered investment companies from purchasing single family homes; to the Committee on Financial
Services.
By Ms. MACE:
H.R. 7222. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to include watercraft as applicable passenger vehicles for purpose of deducting personal loan interest; to the Committee on Ways and Means.
By Ms. MENG (for herself, Ms. CHU, Mr.
GOLDMAN of New York, and Mr.
VARGAS):
H.R. 7223. A bill to improve access to Federal services by individuals with limited
English proficiency, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
By Mrs. MILLER of West Virginia (for
herself and Mr. BEYER):
H.R. 7224. A bill to provide for informal
entry of certain shipments of merchandise,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
Ways and Means.
By Mr. MOORE of North Carolina (for
himself and Mr. CORREA):
H.R. 7225. A bill to strengthen protections
for child sex trafficking victims testifying
against human traffickers; to the Committee
on the Judiciary.
By Mr. MOORE of Utah (for himself
and Mr. BEAN of Florida):
H.R. 7226. A bill to require the use of artificial intelligence to review agency regulations, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition to
the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, for a period to be subsequently
determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin (for herself, Mrs. DINGELL, Mrs. MCBATH, Ms.
STANSBURY, Mr. TORRES of New York,
Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN, Ms. DELBENE,
Ms. SEWELL, Mr. HORSFORD, Ms. DEAN
of Pennsylvania, Ms. TLAIB, Mr.
COHEN, Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania, Mr.
GOTTHEIMER, Mr. JOHNSON of Georgia,
Ms. TITUS, Mr. THANEDAR, and Ms.
NORTON):
H.R. 7227. A bill to amend the Public
Health Service Act, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, and the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to require that
group health plans and health insurance
issuers offering group or individual health
insurance that provide coverage for mental
health services and substance use disorder

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

08:43 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

services provide such services without the
imposition of cost-sharing from the diagnosis of pregnancy through the 1-year period
following such pregnancy, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, and in addition to the Committees on
Education and Workforce, Ways and Means,
and Oversight and Government Reform, for a
period to be subsequently determined by the
Speaker, in each case for consideration of
such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin (for herself, Ms. JOHNSON of Texas, and Ms.
NORTON):
H.R. 7228. A bill to amend title VII of the
Social Security Act to improve the Social
Security Administration’s procedures to
close or reduce access to field offices, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Ways
and Means.
By Mr. MOYLAN (for himself and Ms.
KING-HINDS):
H.R. 7229. A bill to amend the Small Business Act to provide for loan guarantees to
certain small businesses, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Small Business.
By Mr. MURPHY (for himself, Ms. SEWELL, Mr. ROUZER, Mr. ESPAILLAT,
Mr. KUSTOFF, Mr. DAVID SCOTT of
Georgia, Mr. CAREY, Mr. DAVIS of
North Carolina, Mr. THOMPSON of
Pennsylvania, Mr. VICENTE GONZALEZ
of Texas, Mr. MOORE of Alabama, Ms.
ADAMS, Mr. MANN, Ms. BROWN, Mr.
ALLEN, Mr. FIGURES, Mr. PFLUGER,
Mr. COSTA, Mr. CRAWFORD, Mr.
BISHOP, Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia,
Mr. GRAY, Mr. JACKSON of Texas, and
Mr. CARBAJAL):
H.R. 7230. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to establish a domestic cotton consumption credit; to the Committee
on Ways and Means.
By Mrs. RAMIREZ (for herself, Ms.
WILLIAMS of Georgia, Mr. MULLIN,
and Ms. SIMON):
H.R. 7231. A bill to amend the Lobbying
Disclosure Act of 1995 to expand the scope of
individuals and activities which are subject
to the requirements of such Act, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Ms. STEVENS:
H.R. 7232. A bill to amend the Higher Education Act of 1965 to provide a student loan
allowance calculation for purposes of determining the student aid index; to the Committee on Education and Workforce.
By Mr. TORRES of New York (for himself, Mr. SOTO, and Mr. THANEDAR):
H.R. 7233. A bill to amend the Immigration
and Nationality Act to provide require officers and employees of U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement and U.S. Customs and
Border Protection engaged in law enforcement or immigration enforcement activities
to wear a clearly visible and scannable QR
code, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition to
the Committee on Homeland Security, for a
period to be subsequently determined by the
Speaker, in each case for consideration of
such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. VALADAO (for himself, Mr.
CARTER of Louisiana, and Mr. DAVIS
of North Carolina):
H.R. 7234. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Homeland Security to establish a Blue Campaign Certification Program to encourage
employers in covered industries to encourage
employees to complete training to recognize
and respond to suspected human trafficking,
and for other purposes; to the Committee on
the Judiciary, and in addition to the Committee on Homeland Security, for a period to
be subsequently determined by the Speaker,

PO 00000

Frm 00176

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. GILL of Texas:
H.J. Res. 142. A joint resolution disapproving the action of the District of Columbia Council in approving the D.C. Income
and Franchise Tax Conformity and Revision
Temporary Amendment Act of 2025; to the
Committee on Oversight and Government
Reform.
By Mr. MCGOVERN:
H.J. Res. 143. A joint resolution enabling
Congress to advance important policies; to
the Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition to the Committees on Veterans’ Affairs,
Armed Services, Energy and Commerce,
Transportation and Infrastructure, Financial
Services, Education and Workforce, Oversight and Government Reform, Foreign Affairs, Agriculture, Natural Resources, Small
Business, Science, Space, and Technology,
Homeland Security, Intelligence (Permanent
Select), House Administration, Ways and
Means, Rules, Ethics, the Budget, and Appropriations, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mrs. LUNA:
H. Res. 1015. A resolution recommending
that the House of Representatives find William J. Clinton and Hillary R. Clinton in
contempt of Congress for refusal to comply
with a subpoena duly issued by the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform; to the Committee on Rules.
By Mr. CISCOMANI:
H. Res. 1016. A resolution directing the
Clerk of the House of Representatives to
make a correction in the engrossment of
H.R. 7147; considered and agreed to.
By Ms. BARRAGÁN:
H. Res. 1017. A resolution recognizing the
threat of air pollution and extreme heat to
maternal and infant health, and expressing
the sense of the House of Representatives
that meaningful interventions must be rapidly and equitably developed and deployed to
address the unique vulnerabilities of pregnancy in Latino communities; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Ms. CLARKE of New York (for herself, Mr. MEEKS, Ms. PRESSLEY, Mrs.
CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK, Ms. WATERS,
Ms. PLASKETT, Ms. WILSON of Florida,
Mr. FROST, Mr. JACKSON of Illinois,
Ms. NORTON, Mr. BELL, Mr. CARSON,
Ms. CROCKETT, Mrs. MCIVER, Mr.
JOHNSON of Georgia, Mrs. BEATTY,
Ms. MCBRIDE, Ms. VELÁZQUEZ, Ms.
LOFGREN, Ms. SEWELL, Mr. MFUME,
Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Ms. SIMON,
Mrs. RAMIREZ, Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN,
Ms.
KAMLAGER-DOVE,
Mr.
THANEDAR, Mr. HORSFORD, Ms. SCHAKOWSKY, Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania,
Mr. CLEAVER, Ms. UNDERWOOD, Ms.
JAYAPAL, Ms. TLAIB, Mr. MANNION,
Mr. THOMPSON of Mississippi, Ms.
GARCIA of Texas, Ms. KELLY of Illinois, Mr. SOTO, Ms. BROWN, Mr.
VEASEY, Mr. TORRES of New York,
Mr. CARBAJAL, Mr. BISHOP, Ms.
Mr.
FIGURES,
Mr.
MCCLELLAN,
MCGOVERN, and Ms. MENG):
H. Res. 1018. A resolution expressing the
sense of the House of Representatives that
protecting and advancing the rights of
women and girls in the Republic of Haiti is
critical to the success of Haiti’s transition
from crisis and its future stability, condemning the failure to center women’s leadership and distinct needs to date, and calling
for urgent measures to secure all human
rights of women and girls in Haiti; to the
Committee on Foreign Affairs, and in addition to the Committee on Armed Services,

E:\CR\FM\L22JA7.100

H22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

for a period to be subsequently determined
by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
f

MEMORIALS
Under clause 3 of rule XII,
ML-49. The SPEAKER presented a memorial of the House of Representatives of the
State of Ohio, relative to House Resolution
No. 243, requesting the Secretary of the Air
Force select the 121st Air Refueling Wing at
the Rickenbacker Air National Guard Base
in Columbus, Ohio as the preferred main operating base for the KC-46 Pegasus refueling
aircraft; which was referred to the Committee on Armed Services.
f

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY
STATEMENT
Pursuant to clause 7 of Rule XII of
the Rules of the House of Representatives, the following statements are submitted regarding the specific powers
granted to Congress in the Constitution to enact the accompanying bill or
joint resolution.
By Mr. ALLEN:
H.R. 7195.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 3
By Mr. BARRETT:
H.R. 7196.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8
By Mr. BELL:
H.R. 7197.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 , Section 8
By Mr. BERA:
H.R. 7198.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8 Clause 18
By Mr. BERGMAN:
H.R. 7199.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18 of the United
States Constitution
By Mr. BIGGS of Arizona:
H.R. 7200.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, section 8, clause 3 of the United
States Constitution (To regulate Commerce
with foreign Nations, and among the several
States, and with the Indian Tribes); and Article I, section 8, clause 4 of the United
States Constitution (To establish an uniform
Rule of Naturalization, and uniform Laws on
the subject of Bankruptcies throughout the
United States).
By Ms. BYNUM:
H.R. 7201.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Ms. BYNUM:
H.R. 7202.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Ms. BYNUM:
H.R. 7203.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Ms. BYNUM:
H.R. 7204.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:43 Jan 23, 2026

H1351

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Ms. BYNUM:
H.R. 7205.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Ms. CRAIG:
H.R. 7206.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
The commerce clause power under article
1, section 8, clause 3 of the U.S. Constitution.
By Ms. CRAIG:
H.R. 7207.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
U.S. Const. art. 1, Sec. 8
By Mr. CRENSHAW:
H.R. 7208.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Clause 3 of section 8 of article I of the Constitution
By Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania:
H.R. 7209.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. FITZPATRICK:
H.R. 7210.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8 Clause 18
By Mr. GRIFFITH:
H.R. 7211.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution as well as Amendment XVI
By Mr. GRIFFITH:
H.R. 7212.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution as well as Amendment XVI
By Mr. GROTHMAN:
H.R. 7213.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution
By Mr. HARDER of California:
H.R. 7214.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the Constitution
By Mr. HARDER of California:
H.R. 7215.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8 of the Constitution
By Mr. KEAN:
H.R. 7216.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Clause 18 of section 8 of article 1
By Mr. LATIMER:
H.R. 7217.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 3 of the U.S.
Constitution
By Mr. LAWLER:
H.R. 7218.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8 Clause 18 of the U.S.
Constitution
By Mr. LAWLER:
H.R. 7219.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I Section 8 Clause 18 of the U.S.
Constitution
By Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania:
H.R. 7220.

PO 00000

Frm 00177

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Art. I, Sec. 8
By Mrs. LUNA:
H.R. 7221.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution of
the United States.
By Ms. MACE:
H.R. 7222.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution.
By Ms. MENG:
H.R. 7223.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution [page H10170]
By Mrs. MILLER of West Virginia:
H.R. 7224.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. MOORE of North Carolina:
H.R. 7225.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I Sec 8
By Mr. MOORE of Utah:
H.R. 7226.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin:
H.R. 7227.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin:
H.R. 7228.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1
By Mr. MOYLAN:
H.R. 7229.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 1
By Mr. MURPHY:
H.R. 7230.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mrs. RAMIREZ:
H.R. 7231.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution of
the United States
By Ms. STEVENS:
H.R. 7232.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
This bill is enacted pursuant to the power
granted to Congress under Article I, Section,
8, Clause 18 of the United Sates Constitution.
By Mr. TORRES of New York:
H.R. 7233.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 , Section 8.
By Mr. VALADAO:
H.R. 7234.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. GILL of Texas:
H.J. Res. 142.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Mr. MCGOVERN:
H.J. Res. 143.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
f

ADDITIONAL SPONSORS
Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors
were added to public bills and resolutions, as follows:

E:\CR\FM\L22JA7.100

H22JAPT1

H1352

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H.R. 116: Mr. MOORE of West Virginia.
H.R. 210: Mr. DAVIS of Illinois.
H.R. 251: Mr. MOORE of West Virginia.
H.R. 485: Mr. MACKENZIE.
H.R. 507: Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI.
H.R. 539: Mr. COURTNEY, Mr. BISHOP, Ms.
FEDORCHAK, Mr. BABIN, and Mr. MAST.
H.R. 595: Mr. BEAN of Florida.
H.R. 631: Mr. OWENS.
H.R. 764: Mrs. BEATTY.
H.R. 935: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 1061: Ms. MCDONALD RIVET, Mr.
MCGARVEY, and Mr. NORCROSS.
H.R. 1065: Mr. MOSKOWITZ.
H.R. 1083: Mr. CARTER of Georgia.
H.R. 1183: Ms. CROCKETT.
H.R. 1207: Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia.
H.R. 1229: Mr. KNOTT.
H.R. 1330: Mr. SORENSEN, Mr. LICCARDO, Mr.
SHERMAN, and Mrs. SYKES.
H.R. 1346: Ms. FEDORCHAK.
H.R. 1384: Mr. CARTER of Louisiana.
H.R. 1422: Mr. WIED and Mr. LARSEN of
Washington.
H.R. 1564: Mr. MANNIOn.
H.R. 1707: Mr. VICENTE GONZALEZ of Texas.
H.R. 1810: Ms. KELLY of Illinois.
H.R. 2003: Mrs. MILLER-MEEKS.
H.R. 2004: Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 2089: Mr. GRAVES.
H.R. 2094: Mr. AMODEI of Nevada and Mr.
ELLZEY.
H.R. 2368: Mr. LARSEN of Washington.
H.R. 2398: Ms. PINGREE.
H.R. 2488: Ms. SÁNCHEZ, Mrs. TORRES of
California, Ms. PELOSI, Mr. CALVERT, Mr.
FONG, Mr. ISSA, Mr. MCCLINTOCK, Mr. THOMPSON of California, and Mr. VALADAO.
H.R. 2585: Mr. CASTRO of Texas.
H.R. 2586: Mr. PETERS.
H.R. 2672: Ms. ADAMS.
H.R. 2853: Ms. PETTERSEN, Ms. MORRISON,
and Mr. NUNN of Iowa.
H.R. 2891: Mr. MILLER of Ohio.
H.R. 2892: Mr. SCHWEIKERT.
H.R. 3028: Ms. TENNEY.
H.R. 3139: Ms. MCCOLLUM.
H.R. 3310: Ms. GARCIA of Texas.
H.R. 3449: Ms. PETTERSEN and Mr. RILEY of
New York.
H.R. 3512: Mr. SMITH of Nebraska.
H.R. 3513: Ms. LEE of Nevada and Ms.
HOYLE of Oregon.
H.R. 3514: Mr. ESTES, Mr. CLEAVER, and Mr.
CLINE.
H.R. 3544: Mr. MIN.
H.R. 3562: Ms. DE LA CRUZ, Mr. COSTA, Ms.
LETLOW, Mr. KHANNA, Mr. TIMMONS, Mr.
AUCHINCLOSS, Mr. BUCHANAN, Mr. DAVIS of
North Carolina, Mrs. MILLER-MEEKS, Mrs.
WATSON COLEMAN, and Mrs. WAGNER.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

08:43 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

H.R. 3624: Mr. SORENSEN.
H.R. 3683: Ms. DE LA CRUZ.
H.R. 3694: Mr. SORENSEN.
H.R. 3699: Mr. MCCAUL.
H.R. 3722: Mr. MACKENZIE.
H.R. 3757: Mr. MORELLe, Mr. CASAR, and
Ms. GARCIA of Texas.
H.R. 3946: Mr. FINE.
H.R. 4084: Mr. IVEY.
H.R. 4206: Ms. SALAZAR and Mr. CASTEN.
H.R. 4448: Mr. JACK.
H.R. 4457: Mr. COHEN.
H.R. 4509: Mr. THANEDAR.
H.R. 4525: Ms. MENG and Ms. TITUS.
H.R. 4568: Mr. SUOZZI and Ms. GILLEN.
H.R. 4620: Mr. JACK.
H.R. 4669: Mr. SUOZZI and Mr. MURPHY.
H.R. 4731: Mr. AGUILAR, Mr. COHEN, Mr.
MORELLE, Ms. TITUS, Ms. STANSBURY, and
Ms. SÁNCHEZ.
H.R. 4964: Mr. HUDSON.
H.R. 4966: Mrs. MCCLAIN DELANEY.
H.R. 5111: Mr. JOHNSON of South Dakota.
H.R. 5267: Mr. RULLI, Mr. CASE, Mr. MILLER
of Ohio, and Ms. FEDORCHAK.
H.R. 5309: Mr. MOOLENAAR.
H.R. 5350: Ms. CROCKETT.
H.R. 5369: Mr. CASTRO of Texas.
H.R. 5434: Mr. ESPAILLAT.
H.R. 5438: Ms. FOXX.
H.R. 5476: Mr. PAPPAS.
H.R. 5491: Mr. LAWLER.
H.R. 5509: Mr. PANETTA.
H.R. 5519: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 5710: Mr. VALADAO and Mr. ALFORD.
H.R. 5973: Mr. VEASEY, Mr. MULLIN, and Ms.
GOODLANDER.
H.R. 6015: Mrs. FOUSHEE.
H.R. 6069: Mrs. FOUSHEE.
H.R. 6091: Ms. JOHNSON of Texas, Mr. CASTRO of Texas, Mr. SCOTT of Virginia, and Mr.
GARCÍA of Illinois.
H.R. 6138: Ms. WILSON of Florida.
H.R. 6170: Mr. SCHWEIKERT.
H.R. 6184: Mr. SORENSEN.
H.R. 6277: Mr. THANEDAR, Ms. MALOY, Mr.
FULCHER, and Mr. COSTA.
H.R. 6312: Ms. MCBRIDE.
H.R. 6318: Mr. ESPAILLAT.
H.R. 6390: Mrs. FOUSHEE.
H.R. 6425: Mr. VASQUEZ.
H.R. 6430: Ms. JOHNSON of Texas.
H.R. 6437: Mr. GOLDMAN of Texas.
H.R. 6446: Mr. GOLDEN of Maine.
H.R. 6505: Ms. MCCLELLAN.
H.R. 6617: Mr. MRVAN.
H.R. 6677: Mr. LATIMER.
H.R. 6730: Mr. RUTHERFORD, Ms. TOKUDA,
and Ms. TITUS.
H.R. 6731: Mr. COHEN, Ms. FRIEDMAN, Mr.
KEATING, Mr. TONKO, Mr. LEVIN, Mr.

PO 00000

Frm 00178

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

MCGARVEY, Ms. CASTOR of Florida, and Mr.
BELL.
H.R. 6766: Mr. FINE, Ms. DAVIDS of Kansas,
Mrs. TRAHAN, Mr. ROGERS of Alabama, Ms.
MENG, Mrs. LUNA, Ms. ROSS, Mr. BACON, Ms.
PEREZ, and Mr. CARBAJAL.
H.R. 6786: Ms. MCCOLLUM.
H.R. 6797: Mr. MACKENZIE.
H.R. 6806: Mr. MCGOVERN and Ms. CLARKE
of New York.
H.R. 6818: Ms. MCCOLLUM.
H.R. 6840: Ms. TITUS and Mr. CASTRO of
Texas.
H.R. 6854: Mr. HAMADEH of Arizona.
H.R. 6864: Ms. LOFGREN.
H.R. 6875: Mr. NEWHOUSE, Ms. KAMLAGERDOVE, and Mr. SHERMAN.
H.R. 6908: Mr. MANNION.
H.R. 6949: Mr. TAYLOR.
H.R. 6955: Mr. KNOTT.
H.R. 6972: Mr. SCHWEIKERT.
H.R. 6976: Mr. HARRIGAN and Mr. SORENSEN.
H.R. 7008: Mr. GUEST.
H.R. 7016: Mr. SORENSEN and Mr. NADLER.
H.R. 7033: Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 7038: Ms. SALINAS.
H.R. 7046: Ms. PINGREE.
H.R. 7053: Mrs. FLETCHER.
H.R. 7057: Mrs. HAYES.
H.R. 7071: Mr. THANEDAR.
H.R. 7077: Ms. CRAIG.
H.R. 7084: Mr. STRONG.
H.R. 7086: Ms. TOKUDA.
H.R. 7088: Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE, Mr. RYAN,
and Ms. JOHNSON of Texas.
H.R. 7094: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 7095: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 7110: Mrs. HAYES and Mr. CASAR.
H.R. 7128: Mr. CLEAVER, Ms. VELÁZQUEZ,
and Ms. PRESSLEY.
H.R. 7152: Mr. HARDER of California.
H.R. 7163: Ms. GOODLANDER.
H.R. 7166: Ms. TLAIB.
H.R. 7172: Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 7177: Mr. BOST.
H.R. 7183: Mr. JOHNSON of Georgia.
H.R. 7186: Mr. CARTER of Georgia.
H.R. 7188: Mr. BEAN of Florida and Mr. WILSON of South Carolina.
H. Con. Res. 68: Ms. MORRISON and Mr.
HARDER of California.
H. Res. 297: Mr. SORENSEN.
H. Res. 858: Mr. HARIDOPOLOS.
H. Res. 993: Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida
and Mr. WITTMAN.
H. Res. 996: Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania and
Ms. SALINAS.
H. Res. 1002: Mrs. HAYES.
H. Res. 1004: Ms. STEVENS, Mr. BELL, and
Mrs. FLETCHER.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA7.034

H22JAPT1

UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

M

S

United States
of America

Congressional Record
PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, THURSDAY, JANUARY 22, 2026

No. 15

Senate
(Legislative day of Thursday, January 15, 2026)

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE

The Senate met at 11 and 1 second
a.m., on the expiration of the recess,
and was called to order by the President pro tempore (Mr. GRASSLEY)

RECESS UNTIL MONDAY, JANUARY
26, 2026, AT 3 P.M.
The PRESIDENT pro tempore. Under
the previous order, the Senate stands

in recess until 3 p.m. on Monday, January 26, 2026.
Thereupon, the Senate, at 11 and 16
seconds a.m., recessed until Monday,
January 26, 2026, at 3 p.m.

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
S275

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:39 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4624

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A22JA6.000

S22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

E65

EXTENSIONS OF REMARKS
REMEMBERING THE LIFE AND
LEGACY OF COLONEL RICHARD
EUGENE ‘‘GENE’’ SMITH, JR.

HON. TRENT KELLY
OF MISSISSIPPI

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. KELLY of Mississippi. Mr. Speaker,
today I rise to honor the life of Richard Eugene ‘‘Gene’’ Smith, Jr. of West Point, Mississippi, who passed away on January 16,
2026, at the age of 90. A man of deep faith
and quiet courage, Gene was a decorated
U.S. Air Force officer, devoted husband, father, and grandfather.
Born January 17, 1935, in Marks, Mississippi, Gene grew up in Tunica and earned
the rank of Eagle Scout at age 13. A graduate
of Mississippi State University, he was commissioned through the Air Force ROTC program in 1956 and served as a fighter pilot in
the F–102 and F–105. On October 25, 1967,
during his 33rd combat mission over North
Vietnam, his aircraft was shot down, and he
endured five and a half years as a prisoner of
war, including time in the Hanoi Hilton. He
was released during Operation Homecoming
on March 14, 1973.
Colonel Smith received two Purple Hearts,
the Silver Star, the Distinguished Flying Cross
with Valor, the Bronze Star with Valor, and the
Air Medal. He retired from the Air Force in
1978 and later served as Executive Director of
the Golden Triangle Regional Airport and as
National President and Chairman of the Board
of the Air Force Association.
Anchored by his faith in Jesus Christ, Gene
was a longtime member and Elder Emeritus of
First Presbyterian Church in West Point. He
loved golf, fishing, Mississippi State University,
and, above all, time with his family.
He was preceded in death by his first wife,
Rae Smith, and is survived by his wife of 22
years, Lynn Crowe Smith; his children, Kelly
Lucas (George), Rick Smith (Pam), Stacy
Kellum (Steve), Stacey Miears (Doug), and
Erin Holland (Kevin); 11 grandchildren; and
seven great-grandchildren.
f

RECOGNIZING UNITED STATES MARINE
CORPS
VETERAN
DOMENICO S. MOCERI

HON. LISA C. McCLAIN

fore answering the call to serve his country.
He enlisted in the Marine Corps on November
7, 2017, completing recruit training at Marine
Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island, followed by
infantry training at the School of Infantry.
During his military career, Domenico served
as an Infantry Rifleman and later as a Small
Unmanned Aircraft System Operator. He was
assigned to 1st Battalion, 8th Marines, Bravo
Company, where he served as an Automatic
Rifleman and advanced to become a Senior
SUAS Operator. He later transferred to 6th
Marine Regiment Headquarters Battalion, expanding his technical and operational expertise in unmanned aerial systems.
Mr. Moceri’s service included multiple overseas assignments in challenging environments. Early in his career, he joined a Special
Purpose Marine Air-Ground Task Force for operations in Norway, where he participated in
NATO exercises under Operation Thunder
Reindeer and completed intensive arctic survival training. Later, he deployed with the 24th
Marine Expeditionary Unit during Operation Allies Refuge, contributing to a critical mission
that secured the safe relocation of Afghan allies and demonstrated the Marine Corps’ commitment to humanitarian assistance and international security.
Throughout his service, Domenico earned
numerous decorations, including the Navy and
Marine Corps Achievement Medal, two Marine
Corps Good Conduct Medals, the National Defense Service Medal, the Afghanistan Campaign Medal with one Bronze Service Star, the
Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, the
Sea Service Deployment Ribbon with one
Bronze Service Star, and the Presidential Unit
Citation.
Following his honorable discharge in 2023,
Mr. Moceri returned to Michigan and continues
to serve his community as a Construction
Project Manager with Moceri Companies, supporting development projects across Lake
Orion, Auburn Hills, Rochester Hills, and the
City of Rochester. He remains actively engaged in the veteran community as a member
of VFW Post 334, exemplifying the same discipline, integrity, and commitment that marked
his military service.
Mr. Speaker, Domenico Moceri’s honorable
service to our Nation and his continued dedication to his community exemplify the very
best of the United States Marine Corps, and it
is my privilege to recognize him as our Veteran of the Month.
f

OF MICHIGAN

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mrs. MCCLAIN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
with deep respect and gratitude to recognize
the honorable service of United States Marine
Corps veteran, Domenico S. Moceri, our distinguished Veteran of the Month for January
2026. His years of service reflect courage,
adaptability, and an unwavering commitment
to mission and community.
Born and raised in Rochester Hills, Michigan, he graduated from Eaton Academy be-

RECOGNIZING THE 75TH ANNIVERSARY OF PACIFIC DAILY NEWS

HON. JAMES C. MOYLAN
OF GUAM

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. MOYLAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
recognize and celebrate a remarkable milestone, the 75th anniversary of Pacific Daily
News, known across Guam for generations
simply as PDN.

For seventy-five years, PDN has chronicled
life in Guam. Since its founding in 1950, it has
stood as our island’s paper of record, documenting our triumphs, our trials, and the everyday moments that define who we are as a
people.
PDN emerged in the postwar era, at a time
when Guam was rebuilding, redefining itself,
and finding its voice in the modern world. In
those early years, the paper helped connect
families and lay the foundation for a more engaged and informed public. As Guam moved
toward greater self-government, as new institutions took shape, and as our island evolved,
PDN was there, recording history right as it
unfolded.
PDN reported on the passage of the Organic Act, the growth of our civilian government, and the transformation of Guam from a
war-scarred territory into a vibrant, modern
community. It documented the rise of new industries, the opening of schools and hospitals,
and the changing rhythms of island life. Page
by page, year by year, PDN became a living
archive of Guam’s story.
Through typhoons and tragedies, elections
and celebrations, conflicts and recoveries,
PDN has remained a constant and reliable
source of information, reporting from the front
lines often when conditions were difficult and
information scarce. In those moments, PDN
helped our growing community stay informed,
connected, and grounded.
At the same time, PDN has celebrated our
joys. It has told the stories of our graduates
and champions, our cultural festivals and community milestones. It has highlighted the
achievements of our students, athletes, artists,
and entrepreneurs. It has preserved the voices
of our elders and the aspirations of our youth.
PDN has helped ensure that Guam is not invisible. It has given our island a platform, a
mirror, and at times, a conscience. It has carried local concerns into the public and helped
connect Guam to the wider world. For many
beyond our shores, PDN has been their first
window into life on our island.
Behind every headline is a team of dedicated professionals, reporters who chase the
story, photographers who capture history in a
single frame, editors who shape the narrative,
and staff who work long hours to make sure
each edition reaches readers. Their work often
happens quietly, under tight deadlines and
with limited resources, but its impact is felt
across the island every day.
Journalism is not easy work. It requires persistence, integrity, and a willingness to ask
hard questions. It demands accuracy in moments of urgency and fairness in moments of
disagreement. Over 75 years PDN has carried
that responsibility on behalf of the people of
Guam.
In an era of rapid change, shifting media
landscapes, and growing challenges for local
journalism nationwide, PDN’s endurance is a
testament to both resilience and relevance.
Seventy-five years in the industry is a measure of trust earned, credibility built, and service rendered.

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:51 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

E:\CR\FM\A22JA8.001

E22JAPT1

E66

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Today, we honor not only an institution, but
the generations of people who sustained it.
We honor the stories that have been told, the
history that has been preserved, and the
countless readers who have turned to PDN to
understand their world.
I congratulate Pacific Daily News on its 75th
anniversary and thank them for their enduring
service to our island. May PDN continue to inform, challenge, and serve our community for
many years to come.

campaigns for Congress-particularly in 2006,
when I was first elected by a margin of only
83 votes. He never sought any personal benefit, instead he sought only to make our world
a better, fairer place for all.
Today, we honor Brian Anderson—not just
for the laws he helped write, but for the lives
he helped change. He remains a principled
leader whose voice carries the weight of history and whose heart remains firmly, and forever, with the working class.

f

f

HONORING THE CAREER OF BRIAN
ANDERSON

HONORING JIM PEELER

HON. DONALD NORCROSS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

HON. JOE COURTNEY

OF NEW JERSEY

OF CONNECTICUT

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. NORCROSS. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor and commend Jim Peeler for receiving the 2026 Camden County Martin Luther
King, Jr. Congressional Freedom Award. Born
in North Carolina, Jim Peeler moved as a child
with his family to Atlantic City, New Jersey.
After graduating from college, Jim commissioned as a second lieutenant in the United
States Army in 1962. Following his service in
the armed forces, Jim began what would be a
60-year civil service career. He first met Martin
Luther King, Jr. at the 1964 Democratic Convention held in Atlantic city, where he discussed negative demonstrations at the convention and led to his appointment to the then
newly established New Jersey State Division
of Civil Rights by former New Jersey Governor
Richard Hughes.
Jim Peeler had worked in very high intensity
human services roles prior to deciding to dedicate decades of service as an educator and
coach at Overbrook High School and Edward
Junior Highschool now known as Winslow
Township High School. He ended his coaching
career at Cherry Hill High School East, where
he had the opportunity to work under and
alongside Beau Woods and Herb Fisher for
eight years, a time that he reflects upon fondly
to this day. He retired as an educator in 2008.
While he pushed his students both on the
field and in the classroom, Jim Peeler also
continued his education earning a Master of
Administration and Supervision from Rutgers
University. Following his retirement as an educator. Jim worked as an administrator for
Camden County’s Pollution Control Financing
Authority, where he remained as a fixture for
12 years before. formally retiring in 2020.
Meanwhile throughout his career, Jim Peeler
committed himself to civil rights, serving a
combined 24 years as Chairman of the
Human Relations Councils for Cherry Hill,
Camden County, and New Jersey. His time
with the State Human Relations Council was
at the behest of former governors McGreevey
Corzine, and Christie. In 2006 Jim had the opportunity to present a session detailing ways
to Pave the Way for Immigration through
Human Relations at the Human Relations
Council Conference. In 2013, he was awarded
The Hela Yong Memorial Award from the New
Jersey. Commission on Holocaust Education.
Jim Peeler is also a member of Kappa Alpha
Psi Fraternity, Inc., American Legion 68 in
Merchantville, the Cherry Hill Alliance on Alcohol and Drug Abuse, as well as the Cherry Hill
African American Civic Association and several other organizations.

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. COURTNEY. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor the career of Brian Anderson, who is
retiring from AFSCME Council 4 after more
than two decades of service to the hard-working state employees who provide critical services to the people of the state of Connecticut.
The story of Brian Anderson is the story of
the Connecticut labor movement itself—one
defined by grit, persistence, and an
unshakeable belief that every worker deserves
to have their labor treated with dignity and fairness.
Brian’s journey didn’t begin in the halls of
power, but on the manufacturing floor. It was
there that he learned the true value of a day’s
work, a perspective that stayed with him when
he returned to Central Connecticut State University as an adult to turn his passion for justice into a career in public policy. For over 20
years at AFSCME Council 4, Brian has been
more than a Legislative Associate; he has
been the shield and the sword for 30,000 public service workers.
His career is marked by ‘‘impossible’’ victories. Brian stood at the forefront of the fight
to gain full collective bargaining rights for Connecticut’s public sector employees at both the
state and local level. In particular, he fought to
ensure that those who give the ultimate sacrifice, are never forgotten, securing the Fallen
Officer Death Benefit Fund and restoring
PTSD workers’ compensation for those on the
front lines.
From the quiet rooms where he drafted lifechanging legislation to the public forums
where he spoke truth to power, Brian’s impact
is everywhere. He led the charge to ban private prisons, ended the era of captive audience meetings, and stood as the ultimate sentry over the pensions and retirement security
of municipal and state employees.
Beyond the bills passed and the elections
won, Brian is regarded as a ‘‘giant among
men’’ because of his character. He has been
a mentor to a new generation of advocates
and a leader who fought for better pay and
safer conditions for every member of
AFSCME, regardless of political party.
As a member of the Connecticut Democratic
Party’s State Central Committee, Brian
mentored political new-comers and veterans
alike with an inspired passion. He threw himself into campaigns at the federal, state and
local level, knocking on doors, making phone
calls, and poll standing until the final minutes
of election day cheerfully and tirelessly. I personally am grateful for his help in all of my

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:51 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 22, 2026

Today, Jim has been happily married to his
wife, Nancy, for 56 years and are the proud
parents of Michael, Eric, and their late son
Scott. They feel blessed to have their wonderful grandchildren, Chase, Breanna, Sierra,
Brayden, and Shane and when not with family
or volunteering, Jim is fishing or golfing.
Mr. Speaker, I ask you to join me in honoring and commending Jim Peeler, a resident
of Cherry Hill Township, New Jersey, a resident dedicated to his country and community
and who has thoroughly served them both to
the best of his ability.
f

RECOGNIZING THE 100TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ROTARY CLUB OF
WINTER GARDEN

HON. DANIEL WEBSTER
OF FLORIDA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. WEBSTER of Florida. Mr. Speaker, it is
my pleasure to recognize and celebrate the
100th Anniversary of the Rotary Club of Winter Garden.
For the past 100 years, the Rotary Club of
Winter Garden has stood as a pillar of leadership and service. Its business and professional
members have generously volunteered their
time and talents, faithfully upholding Rotary’s
Four-Way Test. Their commitment to these
principles has strengthened the community
and enriched countless lives.
Through community projects, scholarships,
and youth initiatives, the Rotary Club of Winter
Garden has demonstrated unwavering energy
and passion for services. Its enduring support
of West Orange County and communities beyond has made a lasting and positive impact
on generations of residents.
I commend the Rotary Club of Winter Garden for a century of service above self and extend my congratulations on this remarkable
milestone.
f

HONORING MARY ANN NIHART

HON. SAM T. LICCARDO
OF PENNSYLVANIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. LICCARDO. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
along with my colleague, Congressman KEVIN
MULLIN, to recognize the life and contributions
of Mary Ann Nihart, a dedicated public servant, mental health leader, and nurse, whose
lifelong commitment to healing and community
uplifted countless lives across Pacifica, California and beyond. Her work left an indelible
mark on those she served.
Mary Ann’s career in nursing and mental
health spanned decades of compassionate
care and innovative leadership. She began her
service with the San Mateo County Health Department, providing community mental health
support, and later joined the San Francisco
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, where she
rose to become the Clinical Director and Chief
Nurse of Mental Health Services. In this role,
she helped countless veterans receive outstanding psychiatric care. A recognized expert
in her field, Mary Ann co-authored the national
VA Integrated Mental Health guidelines to improve coordinated care for service members

E:\CR\FM\A22JA8.003

E22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

and veterans. She also played a key role in
national suicide prevention initiatives, contributing to programs like the National Action Alliance’s Crisis Now standards for crisis care.
She also held leadership positions in professional organizations, serving as President of
the American Psychiatric Nurses Association
and even being honored as APNA’s Psychiatric Nurse of the Year in 2012. Through
these roles, Mary Ann Nihart helped shape
mental health policy and practice on a national
level, always driven by a passion to save lives
and support those in need.
In addition to her clinical career, Mary Ann
served the people of Pacifica as an elected official. She was first elected to the Pacifica City
Council in 2008 and went on to serve eight
years, including two terms as Mayor in 2011
and 2014. She was a hands-on, visionary
leader who championed public engagement
and collaborative governance. Mary Ann re-instituted the ‘‘Mayor’s Walks’’ to personally
connect local business owners with City Hall,
and she reinstated Pacifica’s Economic Development Committee to spur growth and revitalization. She spearheaded beautification initiatives that transformed neglected areas of the
city, and under her leadership Pacifica even
earned distinction as a finalist among the most
scenic cities in America. Her tireless commitment to her hometown improved the quality of
life in this wonderful coastal community for
residents and delighted visitors.
As a city leader with deep expertise in mental health. Mary Ann also broke new ground in
bridging public safety and healthcare. She
worked closely with local law enforcement to
provide additional education and to reform police training for encounters with people in
mental health crisis. She taught trauma-informed response techniques and expanded
mental health content in officer training
throughout San Mateo County. Mary Ann continually strove to bring community members
together and heal divides, leveraging her professional knowledge to build understanding
between police and the mental health community. This collaborative approach not only
made Pacifica safer and more empathetic, but
also exemplified the kind of inclusive, solutionfocused governance she believed in. Her colleagues and constituents knew her as a leader
with a big heart and a ready smile, always
willing to listen, educate, and find common
ground for the public good.
In every facet of her life, Mary Ann Nihart
embodied courage, kindness, and an unwavering dedication to others. She was a healer,
a mentor, and a bridge-builder. She guided
veterans toward hope and healing, strengthened the nursing profession through her
mentorship and example, and made her community of Pacifica a better and more compassionate place for all. Though we mourn the
loss of this extraordinary woman, we also celebrate a legacy that will continue to inspire. I
offer my deepest condolences to her family,
her friends, and all who were blessed to know
her.
DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. JOHN B. LARSON
OF CONNECTICUT

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. LARSON of Connecticut. Mr. Speaker, I
regrettably missed a vote on January 21,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:51 Jan 23, 2026

E67

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Jkt 069060

2026. Had I been present, I would have voted:
Nay on Roll Call No. 38, on passage of H.J.
Res. 140, Providing for congressional disapproval under Chapter 8 of title 5, United
States Code, of the rule submitted by the Bureau of Land Management relating to Public
Land Order No. 7917 for Withdrawal of Federal Lands; Cook, Lake, and Saint Louis
Counties, MN.
f

HONORING
THE
EXEMPLARY
SERVICE OF COLONEL (RET.)
WILLIAM H. SMITH

HON. DONALD S. BEYER, JR.
OF VIRGINIA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. BEYER. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
recognize and pay tribute to Colonel (Ret.)
William H. Smith for his distinguished and
honorable service to the United States Army
and our Nation. Colonel Smith officially retired
from active duty on April 30, 1977, at Fort
Myer, Virginia, concluding a monumental career that spanned 31 years, 2 months, and 22
days of total active service.
Born on March 14, 1928, Colonel Smith’s
military journey included more than seven
years of prior active service before entering
his final period of duty in 1953. As a leader
within the Transportation Corps, he became
an expert in Personnel Management and Aviation Materiel Management. His dedication to
professional excellence was evidenced by his
extensive education, including training at the
U.S. Army Command and General Staff College and various aviation and transportation
schools.
Colonel Smith was a highly decorated officer whose valor and technical skills were recognized with numerous awards, including: the
Bronze Star Medal; The Meritorious Service
Medal with one Oak Leaf Cluster; The Air
Medal with one Oak Leaf Cluster; The Air
Medal with one Oak Leaf Cluster; The Army
Commendation Medal; The World War II Victory Medal; The Vietnam Service Medal and
the Republic of Vietnam Campaign Medal; and
The Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal with
two Bronze Stars.
His physical courage and specialized skills
were further distinguished, earning him the
Senior Army Aviator Badge, the Parachutist
Badge, and the Glider Badge. Over the course
of his career, he served more than five years
overseas, including a final overseas tour in
Korea.
After a decorated tenure in the United
States Army, Colonel Smith also became a
business owner, and, until his final days,
served his community as a driver for the Fairfax County Public Schools. After eighteen
years, he concluded his final retirement at the
remarkable age of ninety-seven years old.
Colonel Smith’s distinguished legacy is a
testament to his commitment to defending the
United States. His transition from the battlefields of the mid-20th century to high-level personnel and aviation management reflects his
versatility, leadership, and sacrifice throughout
his career. He leaves behind a family who carries forward his strength and a community forever enriched by his presence.
I hope my colleagues will join me in honoring Colonel Smith’s legacy as a father, husband, and soldier driven by faith and service.

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

REMEMBERING THE LIFE AND
LEGACY OF ADAM GRUBBS

HON. TRENT KELLY
OF MISSISSIPPI

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. KELLY of Mississippi. Mr. Speaker,
Adam Grubbs was a young man whose kindness made a real difference to everyone who
knew him, and his loss is felt by many. He
was born in Tupelo and raised in Saltillo by
his parents, Mark and Beth, and grew up with
the values of his community. At Saltillo High
School, people knew him for his good character and for his talent in cross country and
baseball, where he earned the Golden Glove
Award.
At Mississippi State University, he excelled
academically and embraced leadership
through Pi Kappa Alpha (PIKE) Fraternity, the
Interfraternity Council, and the College Republicans. He graduated in December 2017 with a
degree in Communications.
I had the honor of welcoming Adam to my
team in January 2017. From his early role as
a field supervisor in Columbus to his service
in Washington, D.C., as a Scheduler and Legislative Assistant, and Legislative Director.
Adam approached every task with integrity
and enthusiasm. He later served four years as
Deputy District Director. Adam was more than
a valued staff member; he was like family to
all of us. Adam loved history, politics, the outdoors, and people. He was a loyal Mississippi
State football fan who followed the Bulldogs
closely and enjoyed being part of the MSU
community. He found joy in fishing, hunting,
mowing, grilling, and golfing at the Olive
Branch Country Club.
Above all, Adam was devoted to his faith
and family. He cherished his wife, Emma
Kate, and their young son, Graham Henry.
Their second child is expected in February
2026. Adam’s passing is a tremendous loss to
his family, to me, to our team, and to the community he served so faithfully. His life was a
blessing, and his memory will continue to inspire all who knew him.
f

HONORING MOISSES GONZALEZ

HON. VICENTE GONZALEZ
OF TEXAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. VICENTE GONZALEZ of Texas. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to honor Moisses Gonzalez for his distinguished career in law enforcement, his exceptional service to the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security, and his
service to the American people.
Mr. Gonzalez currently serves as Headquarters Unit Chief in the Cross Border Financial Crimes Center within Homeland Security
Investigations. There he oversees a national
and
international
portfolio
targeting
transnational criminal organizations engaged
in identity fraud and the unlawful acquisition of
public benefits. His work plays a critical role in
protecting the integrity of our Nation’s financial
systems and identification documents.
Mr. Gonzalez began his federal service as a
Border Patrol Agent after starting his law enforcement career as a police officer in Brownsville, Texas.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA8.007

E22JAPT1

E68

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Throughout his career, Mr. Gonzalez has
held numerous senior leadership roles of increasing responsibility. He has served as Deputy Chief of Staff for the Office of Firearms
and Tactical Programs, where he oversaw
training for more than 14,000 employees and
managing agency-wide procurement of ammunition and tactical equipment. He also served
as Assistant Special Agent in Charge in San
Francisco, where he led investigative divisions
focused on human trafficking, narcotics, and
child exploitation.
Mr. Gonzalez’s service also includes roles
as Headquarters Unit Chief managing a budget exceeding $15 million, Supervisory Special
Agent and High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area
Task Force Commander in Brownsville, Texas,
and National Operations Manager at HSI
Headquarters directing national criminal investigative priorities. Earlier in his career, he
served as a Special Agent with the United
States Customs Service, conducting investigations into transnational criminal organizations.
A graduate of The University of Texas Rio
Grande Valley, with a degree in Criminal Justice, Mr. Gonzalez exemplifies dedication,
leadership, and service above self. I commend
him for his decades of commitment to public
safety and national security and am honored
to recognize his accomplishments.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

f

On Capitol Hill, Wes Helms has earned a
reputation for sound judgment and steady
leadership that will be deeply missed. His
counsel has been trusted by Members of Congress and their staff alike, who have leaned
on his ability to translate complex operational
needs into clear, actionable priorities. His work
has strengthened congressional understanding
of Marine Corps capabilities and requirements,
ensuring that national security decisions are
informed by firsthand insight and grounded expertise.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that my colleagues join
me in a salute to a man, a father, and a friend
for a lifetime of service in defense of our freedoms. I am eternally grateful for his friendship
and wish him the best of luck in his next chapter.
f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. SHARICE DAVIDS
OF KANSAS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Ms. DAVIDS of Kansas. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in regret that on Roll Call No. 32, on
Motion to Suspend the Rules and Pass H.R.
5763, I mistakenly voted NAY when I intended
to vote YEA.

HONORING THE SERVICE OF MASTER GUNNERY SERGEANT WESLEY ‘‘WES’’ HELMS

RECOGNIZING ANNIE WATSON

HON. ZACHARY NUNN

HON. CHELLIE PINGREE

f

OF IOWA

OF MAINE

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. NUNN of Iowa. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to honor the service of a great friend and true
patriot, Master Gunnery Sergeant Wesley
‘‘Wes’’ Helms. His meritorious service to our
Nation spanned more than 22 years, including
the past three years as a Defense Congressional Fellow and Legislative Liaison through
the House of Representatives Liaison Office,
Marine Corps Office of Legislative Affairs,
where I had the honor of knowing him.
During this time, I had the privilege of working closely with and traveling alongside Gunny
Helms across the Middle East, East Asia, and
to several of our NATO-allied countries. In
every environment and under every circumstance, Wes proved himself a master of
professionalism far beyond his years—a Marine with a get-it-done attitude who always delivered. He planned and executed several
Congressional and Staff Delegation visits to
forward-deployed units, giving lawmakers like
me and their teams firsthand insight into the
lives, challenges, and capabilities of our
servicemembers stationed around the world.
No matter the complexity of the itinerary or the
conditions on the ground, Wes took care of
the people under his charge, and he always
succeeded in the mission of getting everyone
home safely, usually with a laugh, and when
appropriate, a well-earned drink at the end of
a long day.
Beyond his professional excellence, I am
especially grateful for the kindness he showed
my family. He took particular care of my wife,
Kelly, and my daughter, Addi, who experienced her first international trip alongside
Wes—a memory I will always cherish.

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Ms. PINGREE. Mr. Speaker, it is my distinct
honor to recognize Annie Watson as the 2026
recipient of the Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Commissioner’s Distinguished Service Award. This
recognition honors Annie’s remarkable leadership and service in Maine’s agricultural community.
Since opening an organic dairy farm in
Whitefield with her husband, Michael Moody,
in 2013, Annie has dedicated her life to building strong and resilient local food systems in
our state. She is currently President of the
Maine Dairy Industry Association and has
served in leadership roles of the Northeast Organic Family Farm Partnership, Maine Organic
Farmers and Gardeners Association, and the
Agricultural Council of Maine.
There are many challenges that come with
operating a small farm—brutal physical work,
tight budgets, long hours, unpredictable
weather—the list goes on. This work demands
adaptability, determination, and resilience.
Annie exemplifies all these traits and more.
She is a leader. She has not only grown a
successful dairy business but uplifted the
voices of farmers across Maine and the Northeast through her advocacy.
Annie recognizes the interconnectedness of
our farms and communities, and has steadfastly devoted herself to strengthening these
ties, carrying on Maine’s agricultural legacy,
and bolstering our food system and economy.
In the words of Annie herself, ‘‘Maine farms
are not just part of our scenery—they are part
of our soul.’’ We are so lucky to have her
leadership in our state. I thank Annie for all

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:51 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 0634

January 22, 2026

her work to empower our farming community
and feed Maine’s soul.
f

RECOGNIZING MRS. ESSIE POUGH

HON. DANNY K. DAVIS
OF ILLINOIS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. DAVIS of Illinois. Mr. Speaker, today I
rise to recognize and honor Mrs. Essie Pough,
one of my constituents from Oak Park, Illinois
as she prepares to celebrate her 100th birthday on February 11, 2026. Reaching the age
of ‘‘five score’’ is a testament to a century of
grace, wisdom, endurance and love. That
said, on behalf of the 7th District of Illinois, I
congratulate and commend Mrs. Pough on
this incredible milestone.
Born in rural Mississippi in 1926, Mrs.
Pough migrated alongside her husband from
the south to Chicago’s West Side neighborhood of ‘‘K-Town’’, where together they built a
strong foundation and lovingly raised their
eight children anchored in faith, hard work and
respect for others. During her early years in
Chicago’s West Side, Mrs. Pough found her
spiritual home at United Missionary Baptist
Church. She was an active and dedicated
member for over 50 years at United Missionary, enjoying the choir and participating in
various church activities.
After attending Jones Commercial in downtown Chicago, Mrs. Pough began her career
at the Illinois Department of Public Aid, which
later became the Illinois Department of Human
Services. Mrs. Pough worked for the Department for nearly 47 years and was known for
providing stellar customer service and professional assistance to the clients she served. In
fact, Mrs. Pough’s dedication to her profession
led her to learn to speak Spanish in order to
better serve the Spanish speaking residents of
Humboldt Park, which is just one example of
how she would go above and beyond the call
of duty in her illustrious public service career.
Throughout her life, Mrs. Pough remained
committed to service by advocating for causes
such as voting rights, civic engagement, and
youth development. Mrs. Pough is truly an example of a life lived fully. She has been
blessed to break bread with First Lady
Michelle Obama and to cast her vote for Harold Washington, Chicago’s first Black mayor
and for Barack Obama, Americas first Black
President—achievements she believed she
would never witness in her lifetime, but indeed
she did. Defying age, at 94 years old, Mrs.
Pough wrote and recorded her debut song entitled ‘‘Jesus Reigns Forever,’’ earning national
spotlight on NBC, CBS and Fox News in
2020.
Till this day, Mrs. Pough remains a vibrant
and active member of her community, enjoying gardening, bowling, reading her bible and
worshipping at the Living Word Christian Center, in Forest Park Illinois. Above all else, Mrs.
Pough’s greatest life joy continues to be her
legacy of 8 children, 19 grandchildren, 25
great-grandchildren, and 26 great-great-grandchildren.
Mr. Speaker, I consider it both an honor and
privilege to celebrate the 100th birthday of
Mrs. Essie Pough and commend her for an
extraordinary life of service, faith, perseverance, and love.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA8.011

E22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

TRIBUTE TO FORMER CONGRESSMAN
RICHARD
T.
‘‘DICK’’
SCHULZE

HON. BRUCE WESTERMAN
OF ARKANSAS

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, as CoChair of the Congressional Sportsmen’s Caucus, I rise today to honor the life and legacy
of Richard Taylor ‘‘Dick’’ Schulze, a distinguished public servant, conservation advocate,
and a true champion for America’s outdoor
legacy. Today, along with my Co-Chair, Congressman JIMMY PANETTA, and our Vice
Chairs, Congressman AUGUST PFLUGER and
Congressman TROY A. CARTER, SR., we are
proud to carry on the legacy of Congressman
Schulze as bipartisan leaders of the Congressional Sportsmen’s Caucus.
Born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in 1929
to John L. and Grace (Taylor) Schulze, Mr.
Schulze pursued his education at the University of Houston, Villanova University, and
Temple University. A veteran and patriot, he
also served this country in both the U.S. Merchant Marines and the United States Army.
Beyond his military service, he was a successful businessman and devoted public servant.
His commitment to service extended into a
remarkable political career, where he was
elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1975 and served for 18 years.
During his tenure, he rose to the position of
Ranking Member of the House Ways and
Means Committee, a further demonstration of
his leadership. Throughout his distinguished
career, Congressman Schulze maintained a
deep and abiding passion for conservation.
He also served on the Natural Resources
Committee and was a member of the Migratory Bird Conservation Commission, where he
championed the protection and management
of America’s fish and wildlife resources. Recognizing his expertise and dedication, President George H.W. Bush appointed Schulze to
serve on the board of the National Fish and
Wildlife Foundation, further cementing his lifelong commitment to conservation and the outdoors.
Among his most enduring legacies, Schulze
co-founded the bipartisan Congressional
Sportsmen’s Caucus and the Congressional
Sportsmen’s Foundation in 1989, working in
bipartisan fashion alongside former Congressman Robert Lindsay Thomas to bring together
Members of Congress who shared a passion
for hunting, fishing, and wildlife conservation.
Through the Congressional Sportsmen’s Caucus, Mr. Schulze helped establish the largest
and most effective bipartisan platform in Congress to advance policies that benefit sportsmen and women, America’s incredible outdoor
heritage, and a Caucus that we are proud to
lead today.
Congressman Schulze died peacefully at his
home on December 23, 2025, at the age of
96, with his wife of 33 years, Nancy Schulze,
at his side. He was an avid outdoorsman
whose life was defined by service to his country, his community, and the natural world.
Today, we remember and celebrate Richard
T. Schulze, not only for his service in Congress but for his visionary leadership in the
conservation community. His work exemplified
a rare combination of policy acumen, practical

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:51 Jan 23, 2026

E69

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Jkt 069060

conservation knowledge, and an enduring
commitment to bipartisan cooperation. His legacy will continue to guide and inspire Members of the Congressional Sportsmen’s Caucus, the Congressional Sportsmen’s Foundation, and countless individuals who value our
Nation’s outdoor traditions.
We extend our deepest condolences to his
family, friends, and colleagues, and we join
the Nation in honoring a life well lived and a
legacy that will endure for generations to
come.

44 years since becoming a naturalized U.S.
Citizen, I wish her continued health and prosperity.

f

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mrs. MCCLAIN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to
recognize and celebrate the 50th Anniversary
of the Anchor Bay Chamber of Commerce,
commemorating five decades of service, connection, and community growth in the Anchor
Bay region.
Founded in 1976, the Anchor Bay Chamber
of Commerce has remained steadfast in its
mission to support local businesses, foster collaboration, and enhance the quality of life
throughout the community. Over the past half
century, the Chamber has grown into a trusted
resource and a strong voice for business, providing meaningful networking opportunities,
advocacy, and community events that bring
people together and strengthen local ties.
Today, with more than 425 members, the
Anchor Bay Chamber of Commerce continues
to embody its guiding principle to ‘‘Anchor
Your Business in the Community.’’ Through
partnerships, leadership development, and innovation, the Chamber plays a vital role in
promoting economic vitality while reinforcing
the importance of community engagement.
As the Anchor Bay Chamber of Commerce
marks this significant milestone, we honor its
rich history and dedicated leadership while
looking ahead to the next 50 years of growth
and opportunity. The Chamber’s continued
commitment to strengthening both business
and community serves as a model of excellence and civic responsibility.
Mr. Speaker, I extend my sincere congratulations to the Anchor Bay Chamber of Commerce, its members, staff, and ambassadors
on this remarkable achievement, and I wish
them continued success in the years to come.

HIGHLIGHTING GOVERNOR HENRY
MCMASTER’S
2027
EXECUTIVE
BUDGET

HON. JOE WILSON
OF SOUTH CAROLINA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Mr. Speaker, this week Governor Henry McMaster announced his 2027 Executive Budget, benefiting the people of South Carolina. The Executive Budget highlights include:
Investing over one billion dollars in South
Carolina roads;
Cutting income tax;
Raising teacher pay;
Expanding school choice; and
Providing scholarships for workforce technical colleges, developing training opportunities, creating jobs.
With President Trump devolving power back
to the states, I am grateful to continue to work
on behalf of the people of South Carolina,
joining Governor McMaster, the Republican
super majorities in the Senate, led by President Thomas Alexander, the House, with
Speaker Murrell Smith, all to Make America
Great Again.
In conclusion, God Bless Our Troops as the
Global War on Terrorism continues. Trump is
reinstituting Peace Through Strength, revealing war criminal Putin lies, insulting Trump and
mocking Trump with continued mass murder
of Ukrainian civilians. I support the Arctic security initiative President Trump has in Greenland with our allies. The most effective and
least costly policy is to defeat war criminal
Putin in Ukraine which deters missile attacks
by the Chinese Communist Party.

f

HONORING THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ANCHOR BAY
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

HON. LISA C. McCLAIN
OF MICHIGAN

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

f

HONORING NANCY CAROLE LONG

HON. TRENT KELLY
OF MISSISSIPPI

f

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

HONORING BRIGID LUKAS

HON. JAMES C. MOYLAN
OF GUAM

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. MOYLAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise to wish a
happy 90th birthday to Brigid Lukas and acknowledge her life of patriotism.
Mrs. Lukas grew up in Great Brittan but
came to the United States where she built a
family and raised her four children. Her late
husband Rimas also came to the United
States as a young person, where he escaped
communism and worked as an engineer for
the Department of the Army. Together Brigid
and Rimas are a testament to the American
way of life.
As Brigid celebrates her 90th birthday this
month and looks forward to commemorating

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

Thursday, January 22, 2026
Mr. KELLY of Mississippi. Mr. Speaker,
today I rise to recognize Nancy Carole Long of
Saltillo, Mississippi, for her many years of
faithful service to the music ministry of SMC
and for her dedication to music education in
the Saltillo community. For decades, Nancy
played an important role in the life of the
church, and members of the congregation,
along with friends and family, recently gathered to honor her upon her well-earned retirement as the church’s longtime pianist.
In addition to her service at the church,
Nancy has also shared her love of music as
a music teacher at Saltillo Elementary School,
where she inspired countless students and
helped foster an appreciation for the arts at an
early age.
Throughout her years of service, Nancy
shared her musical gifts with humility, consistency, and a servant’s heart. Her music helped

E:\CR\FM\A22JA8.016

E22JAPT1

E70

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with REMARKS

guide worship each week, creating a meaningful atmosphere of praise and reflection for
generations of congregants.
In recognition of her lasting impact, the
church’s newly renovated choir room has been
dedicated as the Nancy Carole Long Choir

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:51 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

Room, a lasting tribute to her commitment to
excellence and devotion to the ministry of
music.
Nancy’s influence extends beyond her time
at the piano and the classroom. Her faithfulness and kindness have left a lasting mark on

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

January 22, 2026

her church, her students, and the Saltillo community, and her legacy will continue to be felt
for years to come.

E:\CR\FM\A22JA8.020

E22JAPT1

Thursday, January 22, 2026

Daily Digest
Senate
Chamber Action

Committee Meetings

The Senate met at 11:00:01 a.m. in pro forma session, and recessed at 11:00:16 a.m. until 3 p.m. on
Monday, January 26, 2026.

No committee meetings were held.

h

House of Representatives
Chamber Action

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Public Bills and Resolutions Introduced: 40 public bills, H.R. 7195–7234; and 6 resolutions, H.J.
Res. 142–143; and H. Res. 1015–1018 were introPages H1349–51
duced.
Additional Cosponsors:
Pages H1351–52
Report Filed: A report was filed today as follows:
H. Res. 1014, providing for consideration of the
bill (H.R. 7148) making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes; providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 7147) making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, and for other purposes; and for
Page H1349
other purposes (H. Rept. 119–462).
Speaker: Read a letter from the Speaker wherein he
appointed Representative Valadao to act as Speaker
Page H1175
pro tempore for today.
Recess: The House recessed at 10:16 a.m. and reconvened at 10:30 a.m.
Page H1183
Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026: The House passed H.R. 7147,
making further consolidated appropriations for the
fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, by a yea-andnay vote of 220 yeas to 207 nays, Roll No. 42.

with none voting ‘‘nay’’, Roll No. 40, and the previous question was ordered by a yea-and-nay vote of
214 yeas to 213 nays, Roll No. 39. Pursuant to section 6 of H. Res. 1014, H. Res. 375 is considered
Pages H1177–83, H1183–85
agreed to as amended.
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026: The
House passed H.R. 7148, making further consolidated appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2026, by a yea-and-nay vote of 341 yeas
to 88 nays, Roll No. 45. Pages H1185–H1297, H1332–33
Pursuant to the Rule, the amendment printed in
part A of the report of the Committee on Rules accompanying this resolution shall be considered as
adopted in the House and in the Committee of the
Pages H1193–H1297
Whole.
Rejected:
Massie amendment (No. 1 printed in part B of H.
Rept. 119–462) that sought to prohibit the use of
funds made available by this Act to implement section 24220 of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act, including any requirements enabling or supporting vehicle ‘‘kill switch’’ technology (by a recorded vote of 164 ayes to 268 noes, Roll No. 43);
Pages H1297–99, H1331
and
Norman amendment (No. 2 printed in part B of
H. Rept. 119–462) that sought to prohibit funds for
certain community funding projects (by a recorded
vote of 136 ayes to 291 noes, Roll No. 44).

Pages H1177–83, H1299–H1317, H1330, H1299–H1317

Pages H1298–99, H1331–32

H. Res. 1014, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills (H.R. 7148) and (H.R. 7147) was agreed
to by a recorded vote of 214 ayes to 213 noes, Roll
No. 41, after the amendment by Representative Foxx
was agreed to by a yea-and-nay vote of 427 yeas

H. Res. 1014, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills (H.R. 7148) and (H.R. 7147) was agreed
to by a recorded vote of 214 ayes to 213 noes, Roll
No. 41, after the amendment by Representative Foxx
was agreed to by a yea-and-nay vote of 427 yeas
D105

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:58 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 0627

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D22JA6.REC

D22JAPT1

D106

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

with none voting ‘‘nay’’, Roll No. 40, and the previous question was ordered by a yea-and-nay vote of
214 yeas to 213 nays, Roll No. 39. Pursuant to section 6 of H. Res. 1014, H. Res. 375 is considered
Pages H1177–83, H1183–85
agreed to as amended.
Pregnant Students’ Rights Act: The House passed
H.R. 6359, to require institutions of higher education to disseminate information on the rights of,
and accommodations and resources for, pregnant students, by a yea-and-nay vote of 217 yeas to 211
Pages H1325–30, H1333–34
nays, Roll No. 47.
Rejected the Bonamici motion to recommit the
bill to the Committee on Education and Workforce
by a yea-and-nay vote of 213 yeas to 216 nays, Roll
Page H1333
No. 46.
Pursuant to the Rule, the amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the Committee
on Education and Workforce now printed in the bill
Page H1325
shall be considered as adopted.
H. Res. 1009, the rule providing for consideration
of the bills (H.R. 6945), (H.R. 6359) and the joint
resolution (H.J. Res. 140) was agreed to yesterday,
January 21st.
Directing the removal of United States Armed
Forces from Venezuela that have not been authorized by Congress: The House failed to agree to
H. Con. Res. 68, to direct the removal of United
States Armed Forces from Venezuela that have not
been authorized by Congress, by a yea-and-nay vote
of 215 yeas to 215 nays, Roll No. 48.
Pages H1317–25, H1334–35

Directing the Clerk of the House of Representatives to make a correction in the engrossment of
H.R. 7147: The House agreed to H. Res. 1016, directing the Clerk of the House of Representatives to
make a correction in the engrossment of H.R. 7147.

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Page H1335

Work Period Designation: Read a letter from the
Speaker wherein he designated the period from
Thursday, January 22, 2026, through Sunday, February 1, 2026, as a ‘‘district work period’’ under
Page H1335
clause 13 of rule 1.
Discharge Petition: Representative Pressley presented to the clerk a motion to discharge the Committee on Rules from the consideration of the resolution (H. Res. 965) entitled, a resolution providing
for consideration of the bill (H.R. 1689) to require
the Secretary of Homeland Security to designate
Haiti for temporary protected status (Discharge Petition No. 15).
Quorum Calls—Votes: Seven yea-and-nay votes and
three recorded votes developed during the proceedings of today and appear on pages H1183–84,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:58 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 0627

January 22, 2026

H1184–85, H1185, H1330, H1331, H1331–32,
H1332–33, H1333, H1333–34, and H1334–35.
Adjournment: The House met at 9 a.m. and adjourned at 7:31 p.m.

Committee Meetings
EXAMINING THE POLICIES AND
PRIORITIES OF THE MINE SAFETY AND
HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
Committee on Education and Workforce: Subcommittee
on Workforce Protections held a hearing entitled
‘‘Examining the Policies and Priorities of the Mine
Safety and Health Administration’’. Testimony was
heard from Wayne Palmer, Assistant Secretary of
Labor for Mine Safety and Health, Mine Safety and
Health Administration, Department of Labor.
LOWERING HEALTH CARE COSTS FOR ALL
AMERICANS: AN EXAMINATION OF
HEALTH INSURANCE AFFORDABILITY
Committee on Energy and Commerce: Subcommittee on
Health held a hearing entitled ‘‘Lowering Health
Care Costs for All Americans: An Examination of
Health Insurance Affordability’’. Testimony was
heard from public witnesses.
CHEMICALS IN COMMERCE: LEGISLATIVE
PROPOSAL TO MODERNIZE AMERICA’S
CHEMICAL SAFETY LAW, STRENGTHEN
CRITICAL SUPPLY CHAINS, AND GROW
DOMESTIC MANUFACTURING
Committee on Energy and Commerce: Subcommittee on
Environment held a hearing entitled ‘‘Chemicals in
Commerce: Legislative Proposal to Modernize America’s Chemical Safety Law, Strengthen Critical Supply Chains, and Grow Domestic Manufacturing’’.
Testimony was heard from public witnesses.
MISCELLANEOUS MEASURES
Committee on Financial Services: Full Committee held
a markup on H.R. 7128, the ‘‘TRIA Program Reauthorization Act of 2026’’; H. Res. 1007, expressing
the sense of the House of Representatives with respect to the use of artificial intelligence in the financial services and housing industries; H.R. 7056, the
‘‘Community Bank Regulatory Tailoring Act’’; H.R.
5877, the ‘‘Combatting Money Laundering in Cyber
Crime Act of 2025’’; H.R. 1799, the ‘‘Financial Reporting Threshold Modernization Act’’; H.R. 6967,
the ‘‘Public Company Advisory Committee Act of
2026’’; and H.R. 7085, to amend the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 to repeal certain disclosure requirements related to conflict minerals, and for other
purposes. H.R. 7128, H. Res. 1007, H.R. 7056,
H.R. 5877, H.R. 1799, H.R. 6967, and H.R. 7085
were ordered reported, as amended.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D22JA6.REC

D22JAPT1

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

ADVANCING PEACE IN DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO AND RWANDA
THROUGH PRESIDENT TRUMP’S
WASHINGTON ACCORDS
Committee on Foreign Affairs: Africa Subcommittee
held a hearing entitled ‘‘Advancing Peace in DRC
and Rwanda through President Trump’s Washington
Accords’’. Testimony was heard from Sarah Troutman, Deputy Assistant Secretary for African Affairs,
Department of State.
SMARTER BORDERS, SAFER NATION:
EXPANDING THE USE OF NON-INTRUSIVE
INSPECTION TECHNOLOGY
Committee on Homeland Security: Subcommittee on
Border Security and Enforcement held a hearing entitled ‘‘Smarter Borders, Safer Nation: Expanding the
Use of Non-Intrusive Inspection Technology’’. Testimony was heard from Diane J. Sabatino, Acting Executive Assistant Commissioner, Office of Field Operations, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Department of Homeland Security; and Hilary Benedict, Acting Director, Government Accountability
Office.
OVERSIGHT OF THE GOVERNMENT
PUBLISHING OFFICE IN A DIGITAL-FIRST
ERA
Committee on House Administration: Full Committee
held a hearing entitled ‘‘Oversight of the Government Publishing Office in a Digital-First Era’’. Testimony was heard from Hugh Halpern, Director,
Government Publishing Office.
OVERSIGHT OF THE OFFICE OF SPECIAL
COUNSEL JACK SMITH
Committee on the Judiciary: Full Committee held a
hearing entitled ‘‘Oversight of the Office of Special
Counsel Jack Smith’’. Testimony was heard from a
public witness.
MISCELLANEOUS MEASURES
Committee on Natural Resources: Full Committee held
a markup on H.R. 4255, the ‘‘Enhancing Safety for
Animals Act of 2025’’; H.R. 2130, the ‘‘Tribal
Trust Land Homeownership Act of 2025’’; H.R.
3073, the ‘‘Shivwits Band of Paiutes Jurisdictional
Clarity Act’’; H.R. 3340, the ‘‘Modernizing Access
to Our Public Oceans Act’’; H.R. 4294, the ‘‘Mitigation Action and Watermen Support Act of 2025’’;
H.R. 5254, the ‘‘Gateway Partnership Act of 2025’’;
H.R. 5729, the ‘‘North Rim Restoration Act of
2025’’; and H.R. 6365, the ‘‘Wintergreen Emergency Egress Act’’. H.R. 2130, H.R. 3073, H.R.
3340 were ordered reported, without amendment.
H.R. 4255, H.R. 4294, H.R. 5254, H.R. 5729, and
H.R. 6365 were ordered reported, as amended.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:58 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 0627

D107

DEEP DIVE: EXAMINING THE
REGULATORY AND STATUTORY BARRIERS
TO DEEP SEA MINING
Committee on Natural Resources: Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources held a hearing entitled
‘‘Deep Dive: Examining the Regulatory and Statutory Barriers to Deep Sea Mining’’. Testimony was
heard from public witnesses.
DECLASSIFIED MARTIN LUTHER KING
RECORDS: WHAT THEY REVEAL AND WHY
THEY MATTER
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform: Task
Force on the Declassification of Federal Secrets held
a hearing entitled ‘‘Declassified MLK Records: What
They Reveal and Why They Matter’’. Testimony was
heard from public witnesses.
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY: SAVING THE
AMERICAN DREAM
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform: Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Energy Policy, and
Regulatory Affairs held a hearing entitled ‘‘Housing
Affordability: Saving the American Dream’’. Testimony was heard from public witnesses.
CONSOLIDATED APPROPRIATIONS ACT,
2026; DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Committee on Rules: Full Committee concluded a hearing on H.R. 7148, the ‘‘Consolidated Appropriations
Act, 2026’’; and H.R. 7147, the ‘‘Department of
Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026’’. The
Committee granted, by a record vote of 9–4, a rule
providing for consideration of H.R. 7148, the ‘‘Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026’’, and H.R.
7148, the ‘‘Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2026’’. The rule provides for consideration of H.R. 7148, the ‘‘Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2026’’, under a structured rule. The
rule waives all points of order against consideration
of the bill. The rule provides one hour of general debate equally divided and controlled by the chair and
ranking minority member of the Committee on Appropriations or their respective designees. The rule
provides that the amendment printed in part A of
the Rules Committee report shall be considered as
adopted and the bill, as amended, shall be considered as read. The rule waives all points of order
against provisions in the bill, as amended. The rule
makes in order only the further amendments printed
in part B of the Rules Committee report. Each such
further amendment shall be considered only in the
order printed in the report, may be offered only by
a Member designated in the report, shall be considered as read, shall be debatable for the time specified
in the report equally divided and controlled by the

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D22JA6.REC

D22JAPT1

D108

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

proponent and an opponent, shall not be subject to
amendment, and shall not be subject to a demand
for division of the question. The rule waives all
points of order against the amendments printed in
part B of the Rules Committee report. The rule provides one motion to recommit. The rule further provides for consideration of H.R. 7147, the ‘‘Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act,
2026’’, under a closed rule. The rule waives all
points of order against consideration of the bill. The
rule provides that the bill shall be considered as
read. The rule waives all points of order against provisions in the bill. The rule provides one hour of
general debate equally divided and controlled by the
chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Appropriations or their respective designees. The rule provides one motion to recommit.
The rule further provides that the chair of the Committee on Appropriations may insert in the Congressional Record not later than January 23rd, 2026,
such material as he may deem explanatory of H.R.
7148 and H.R. 7147. The rule further provides that
the Clerk shall not transmit to the Senate a message
that the House has passed H.R. 7148 until H.R.
7147 is passed by the House. The rule provides that
in the engrossment of H.R. 7148, the Clerk shall:
add the text of Divisions A, B, and C of H.R. 7006,
as passed by the House, as new matter to follow Division D of H.R. 7148, redesignated as Divisions E,
F, and G, respectively; add the text of titles 1
through 5 of H.R. 7147, as passed by the House,
as new matter designated as Division H, to follow
the text added pursuant to subsection (a); redesignate
Divisions E and F of H.R. 7148 as Divisions I and
J, respectively; assign appropriate designations to
provisions within the engrossment; conform crossreferences and provisions for short titles within the
engrossment; and be authorized to make technical
corrections, to include corrections in spelling, punctuation, page and line numbering, section numbering, and insertion of appropriate headings. Finally, the rule provides that House Resolution 375,
amended by the amendments printed in part C of
the Rules Committee report, is hereby adopted. Testimony was heard from Chairman Cole, and Representatives DeLauro, Tenney, Hoyer, Spartz, Veasey,
Smucker, Gomez, Miller of Ohio, Keating,
Stansbury, Larson of Connecticut, Titus, Johnson of
Texas, Quigley, Horsford, Torres of California, Johnson of Georgia, and Dexter.
NATIONWIDE CONSUMER AND FUEL
RETAILER CHOICE ACT OF 2025
Committee on Rules: Full Committee began a hearing
on H.R. 1346, the ‘‘Nationwide Consumer and Fuel
Retailer Choice Act of 2025’’. Testimony was heard

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:58 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0627

January 22, 2026

from Representatives Palmer, Landsman, Smith of
Nebraska, Budzinski, Hageman, Feenstra, and Miller-Meeks.
ASSESSING U.S. LEADERSHIP IN QUANTUM
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology: Full Committee held a hearing entitled ‘‘Assessing U.S. Leadership in Quantum Science and Technology’’. Testimony was heard from James Kushmerick, Director,
Physical Measurement Laboratory, National Institute
of Standards and Technology, Department of Commerce; Saul Gonzalez, Deputy Directorate Head, Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
National Science Foundation; Mark Clampin, Deputy
Associate Administrator, Science Mission Directorate,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration; and
Tanner Crowder, Quantum Information Science
Lead, Office of Science, Department of Energy.
LOCAL OWNERSHIP, NATIONAL BRANDS:
HOW FRANCHISING IS A PATHWAY TO
ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Committee on Small Business: Full Committee held a
hearing entitled ‘‘Local Ownership, National Brands:
How Franchising is a Pathway to Entrepreneurship’’.
Testimony was heard from public witnesses.
SMARTER SPENDING, STRONGER RESULTS:
REDUCING DUPLICATION AND ENSURING
EFFECTIVENESS THROUGH ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT REFORMS
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure: Subcommittee on Economic Development, Public Buildings, and Emergency Management held a hearing entitled ‘‘Smarter Spending, Stronger Results: Reducing Duplication and Ensuring Effectiveness Through
Economic Development Reforms’’. Testimony was
heard from Ben Page, Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Economic Development and Chief Operating Officer,
U.S. Economic Development Administration, Department of Commerce; Gayle Conelly Manchin,
Federal Co-Chair, Appalachian Regional Commission; Corey Wiggins, Federal Co-Chair, Delta Regional Authority; Chris Saunders, Federal Co-Chair,
Northern Border Regional Commission; Jennifer
Clyburn Reed, Federal Co-Chair, Southeast Crescent
Regional Commission; Juan Sanchez, Federal CoChair, Southwest Border Regional Commission; and
Jocelyn Fenton, Director of Programs, Denali Commission.
COMMUNITY CARE NETWORK NEXT
GENERATION: ONE TRILLION OF
OVERSIGHT
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs: Full Committee held a
hearing entitled ‘‘Community Care Network Next

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D22JA6.REC

D22JAPT1

January 22, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Generation: One Trillion of Oversight’’. Testimony
was heard from Richard F. Topping, Assistant Secretary for Management and Chief Financial Officer,
Department of Veterans Affairs; and public witnesses.
HEARING WITH HEALTH INSURANCE
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
Committee on Ways and Means: Full Committee held
a hearing entitled ‘‘Hearing with Health Insurance
CEOs’’. Testimony was heard from public witnesses.
COVER ENHANCEMENT AUTHORITIES
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence: Subcommittee on Defense Intelligence and Overhead Architecture held a hearing entitled ‘‘Cover Enhancement Authorities’’. Testimony was heard from the
following Department of Defense officials: Lieutenant General Sean M. Farrell, Deputy Commanding
General, U.S. Special Operations Command; Rowena
Ormiston, Director, HUMINT and Sensitive Activities, Office of the Under Secretary of War for Intel-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:58 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 0627

D109

ligence and Security; Colonel Ted D. Price, Chief,
Defense Support Office, Defense Intelligence Agency;
Colleen Swiderski, Director, Joint Defense Accounting Center, Defense Finance and Accounting Service;
and Theresa Whelan, Director, Defense Intelligence
for Sensitive Activities and Special Programs. This
hearing was closed.

Joint Meetings
No joint committee meetings were held.
f

COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR FRIDAY,
JANUARY 23, 2026
(Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated)

Senate
No meetings/hearings scheduled.

House
No hearings are scheduled.

Sfmt 0627

E:\CR\FM\D22JA6.REC

D22JAPT1

D110

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST

January 22, 2026

Next Meeting of the SENATE

Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

3 p.m., Monday, January 26

10 a.m., Friday, January 23

Senate Chamber

House Chamber

Program for Monday: Following a period of morning
business, Senate will vote on the motion to invoke cloture
on the motion to proceed to consideration of S. 3627,
Pregnant Students’ Rights Act, at approximately 5:30
p.m.

Program for Friday: House will meet in Pro Forma session at 10 a.m.

Extensions of Remarks, as inserted in this issue
HOUSE

Gonzalez, Vicente, Tex., E67
Kelly, Trent, Miss., E65, E67, E69
Larson, John B., Conn., E67
Liccardo, Sam T., Calif., E66
McClain, Lisa C., Mich., E65, E69
Moylan, James C., Guam, E65, E69

Beyer, Donald S., Jr., Va., E67
Courtney, Joe, Conn., E66
Davids, Sharice, Kans., E68
Davis, Danny K., Ill., E68

E PL

Congressional Record

IB
U

U

The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage
is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House
of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are
printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United
States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when
two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through
the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov, free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the
Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office.
Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov. ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S.
Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO
63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made
payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following
each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents
in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from
the Congressional Record.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received.
UR

NU

M

S

DMWilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with DIGEST

Norcross, Donald, N.J., E66
Nunn, Zachary, Iowa, E68
Pingree, Chellie, Me., E68
Webster, Daniel, Fla., E66
Westerman, Bruce, Ark., E69
Wilson, Joe, S.C., E69

VerDate Sep 11 2014

09:58 Jan 23, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 0664

Sfmt 0664

E:\CR\FM\D22JA6.REC

D22JAPT1

